Title: The Honest Quorum Problem: Epistemic Byzantine Fault Tolerance for Agentic Infrastructure

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.16109v1

Published Time: Mon, 20 Jul 2026 01:18:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
# The Honest Quorum Problem: Epistemic Byzantine Fault Tolerance for Agentic Infrastructure 

# Jun He OpenKedge.io 

# junhe@openkedge.io 

# Deying Yu OpenKedge.io 

# deying@openkedge.io 

# Abstract 

State machine replication and Byzantine fault-tolerant con-sensus guarantee agreement despite a bounded number of arbitrary faulty participants; Byzantine participants may coor-dinate or collude. These guarantees rely on participants out-side that set correctly implementing the protocol’s transition or validation semantics. Agentic validators expose a weaker partition: an authenticated, responsive, correctly signed, non-equivocating reasoning participant that is protocol-compliant with the voting protocol may nevertheless endorse a semanti-cally invalid state transition. We call the resulting failure mode an epistemic fault and the collective phenomenon the Honest Quorum Problem; here, honest means protocol-compliant, not semantically correct. Such a quorum can satisfy ordinary protocol checks while forming a well-formed certificate for an invalid transition. We show that agreement alone does not establish semantic certifi-cate validity or execution safety. Agentic validators may share model weights or lineage, training distributions, prompts, re-trieval sources, toolchains, evidence, reasoning scaffolds, and provider infrastructure, yielding correlated epistemic faults. We define Epistemic Byzantine Fault Tolerance (EBFT), a fault-tolerance model for agentic infrastructure and other post-deterministic distributed systems. EBFT augments the conventional Byzantine fault bound with separate confidence-indexed quantities: eδ bounds coherent invalid endorsement outside the Byzantine set, and uϵ bounds unusable validator support that degrades liveness. These quantities characterize semantic-safety risk and liveness degradation separately. The paper derives certificate-threshold conditions for semantic cer-tificate validity, consensus agreement, liveness, and feasible quorum-threshold selection, and outlines a calibration method-ology for estimating the budgets. Adding nominally distinct agents improves fault tolerance only when it measurably re-duces the upper-tail concentration of invalid endorsement or unusable support. 

# 1 Introduction 

An operator proposes an infrastructure state mutation: expand a deployment service account from read-only inspection to write authority over a production namespace. Several rea-soning validators inspect the same canonical request, state snapshot, policy context, and evidence package. Each valida-tor authenticates correctly, receives the same request digest, follows the voting protocol, signs the expected message, re-sponds before the timeout, and does not equivocate. A quorum approves the transition, but the transition violates an applica-tion invariant: it crosses the intended control-plane isolation boundary. The protocol succeeds in forming agreement, yet the system commits a semantically invalid action. Classical state machine replication (SMR) and Byzantine fault-tolerant (BFT) consensus already permit arbitrary faulty replicas to coordinate, collude, equivocate, and choose ad-versarial messages [1 –3]. The classical partition is different: replicas outside the declared Byzantine set are assumed to follow the protocol and correctly implement the relevant tran-sition or validation semantics. The Honest Quorum Problem weakens this partition. A participant may remain inside the identity, communication, and protocol envelope while failing at the semantic layer. Probabilistic reasoning networks are replicated or dis-tributed systems in which proposals, plans, approvals, or vali-dations are generated by stochastic reasoning processes. Agen-tic infrastructure is a useful stress case because agent deci-sions can mutate operational state. We use post-deterministic distributed system (PDDS) [4] to describe a system in which protocol coordination can remain deterministic while seman-tically relevant outputs are produced by stochastic, learned, adaptive, or generative computations. The point is not to dis-card deterministic coordination; it is to model what happens when deterministic coordination surrounds nondeterministic semantic judgment. An epistemic fault is a semantically incorrect judgment produced by a participant that remains authenticated, respon-sive, non-equivocating, and compliant with the base proto-1arXiv:2607.16109v1 [cs.LG] 17 Jul 2026 col. Multiple protocol-compliant validators may fail coher-ently because they share model lineage, training distributions, prompt patterns, retrieval sources, toolchains, evidence, rea-soning scaffolds, or provider infrastructure. Nominal identity diversity therefore does not imply epistemic independence. Here, “honest” refers only to identity-, communication-, and protocol-layer compliance; it does not imply semantic cor-rectness. EBFT denotes Epistemic Byzantine Fault Tolerance, the model developed here. EBFT does not replace classical BFT. It augments the conventional bound on arbitrary Byzantine identities with explicit bounds on coherent invalid endorse-ment by protocol-compliant validators and on unusable sup-port caused by rejection, abstention, timeout, divergent output, canonicalization failure, or unresolved uncertainty. The analysis separates three properties: Protocol agreement ̸ = Semantic validity ,

Semantic validity ̸ = Execution safety .

Protocol agreement concerns whether protocol-compliant replicas decide the same certificate or log entry. Semantic certificate validity concerns whether a certified candidate sat-isfies the application’s semantic-validity predicate in the given state and evidence context. Execution safety concerns whether applying the certified transition preserves the operational in-variant of interest. Semantic validity implies execution safety only when the predicate fully captures that invariant. One threshold cannot be obtained by merely reweighting the classical 3f +1 expression. EBFT instead derives separate conditions for preventing an invalid candidate from collecting a certificate, preventing conflicting certificates, and ensuring that a valid candidate can still collect enough usable support. 

The Honest Quorum Problem. A distributed admission pro-tocol exhibits the Honest Quorum Problem when a certificate can be formed by authenticated, responsive, non-equivocating, and protocol-compliant validators for a transition that violates the application’s semantic-validity predicate. EBFT is distinct from Practical Byzantine Fault Toler-ance, commonly abbreviated PBFT, and from probabilistic BFT protocols that use random sampling or probabilistic quorums to reduce communication. In EBFT, probability characterizes the concentration of semantic failures among protocol-compliant reasoning participants. The paper makes four contributions. First, it formalizes the Honest Quorum Problem and the epistemic fault model: protocol-compliant stochastic validators can collectively en-dorse a semantically invalid transition, a failure mode distinct from arbitrary Byzantine, crash, omission, benign, deceitful, or equivocating faults. Second, it defines confidence-indexed epistemic budgets: eδ for coherent invalid endorsement and 

uϵ for unusable support, with both quantities excluding the conventional Byzantine set unless explicitly stated otherwise. Third, it derives EBFT certificate-threshold conditions for semantic certificate validity, agreement, liveness, and feasi-ble threshold selection without claiming tightness beyond the proved intersection and threshold statements. Fourth, it for-mulates diversity-aware assurance: model, prompt, retrieval, provider, and tool diversity are candidate mechanisms for reducing correlation, not proofs of reduced tail risk. This work fits into the OpenKedge research program as positioning, not as a product description. Post-Deterministic Distributed Systems names the class of systems in which de-terministic coordination surrounds stochastic semantic judg-ment. The Honest Quorum Problem identifies a failure mode in that class. EBFT supplies the corresponding fault model and threshold theory. Semantic Quorum Assurance can instan-tiate EBFT-style admission by constructing semantic certifi-cates, while the Sovereign Assurance Boundary is the runtime enforcement boundary that admits or rejects execution based on those certificates [5–7]. Section 2 places EBFT relative to classical consensus, hy-brid fault models, common-mode failure, and probabilistic consensus. Section 3 defines the semantic-certificate model. Section 4 formalizes the Honest Quorum Problem and epis-temic fault budgets. Sections 5 and 6 give the impossibility and threshold results. Section 7 formulates diversity-aware semantic certification, Section 8 gives the evaluation method-ology, and Sections 9–11 discuss related work, limitations, and conclusions. 

# 2 Background and Motivation 

2.1 Byzantine Agreement, SMR, and Quorum Intersec-tion 

Byzantine agreement asks correct processes to decide con-sistently despite a bounded set of processes that may behave arbitrarily [1, 2]. Partially synchronous consensus and practi-cal BFT protocols show how agreement can be engineered with authenticated messages and quorum certificates [8, 9]. Byzantine quorum systems capture the set-intersection ar-gument behind these protocols: two conflicting certificates cannot both be formed unless too much faulty weight partici-pates [10]. SMR uses consensus to order commands and then relies on deterministic execution to replicate state [3]. Replicas outside the faulty set are assumed to apply an equivalent transition function to the same agreed log entry, so equal logs induce equivalent states. This assumption is what lets the protocol separate ordering from execution. EBFT keeps the ordering theory intact but asks what changes when the decision that a transition is semantically admissible is supplied by stochastic validators rather than by a deterministic transition checker. 

2.2 Validated Consensus and External Validity 

Consensus specifications usually include a validity property in addition to agreement and termination. Some validity no-2tions are weak, requiring only that decisions not be vacuous under favorable inputs; others are external or validated, re-quiring that a decided value satisfy an application predicate. A protocol may therefore require a deterministic predicate 

valid (v) before a value is eligible for certification. When every protocol-compliant replica can evaluate the same predicate and obtain the same answer, conventional external validity can be folded into the consensus interface. Civit et al.’s “On the Validity of Consensus” studies va-lidity properties as first-class objects in Byzantine consen-sus, including which validity properties are solvable and the message-complexity cost of non-trivial validity [11]. EBFT does not invent validity as a consensus property. Its concern is narrower and more operational: semantic validity may be too expensive, contextual, or underspecified to evaluate by a deterministic predicate inside the protocol, so a commit-tee approximates it using stochastic reasoning. The question then becomes whether those approximations can concentrate on the same invalid semantic class while still producing a well-formed certificate. 

2.3 Hybrid Fault Models 

Hybrid fault models refine the fully Byzantine abstraction by distinguishing failure classes. Basilic, for example, intro-duces the Byzantine-deceitful-benign model with t Byzan-tine processes, d deceitful processes, and q benign processes. For consensus, Basilic gives the tight resilience condition 

n > 3t + d + 2 q; for eventual consensus in the blockchain setting it gives the weaker condition n > 2t + d + q [12]. The distinction is useful because some faults primarily threaten safety, while others primarily threaten termination. EBFT is related in spirit but not reducible to this taxonomy. A stochastic semantic validator may be protocol-compliant, authenticated, responsive, and non-equivocating while endors-ing a semantically invalid transition. Such a fault does not automatically map to a deceitful fault, because the validator need not violate the protocol relation observed by other repli-cas; it does not automatically map to a benign fault, because coherent invalid endorsement can threaten semantic certificate validity; and treating it as fully Byzantine may be a sound con-servative reduction but loses the distinction between coherent safety risk and dispersive liveness loss. Table 1 summarizes these distinctions; in the table, Y means yes, N means no, and C means conditional on the fault instance or system assumptions. 

2.4 Common-Mode Failure and Design Diversity 

Common-mode failure is the reason diversity must be mea-sured rather than assumed. N-version programming proposed independently developed software versions as a way to reduce coincident design faults [13]. Knight and Leveson’s experi-mental evaluation challenged the independence assumption by showing that separately produced program versions can fail together [14]. For EBFT, the analogous quantity is not the number of nominally different validators, providers, prompts, or tools. It is the upper-tail concentration of validator weight assigned to one invalid semantic class. Recent work on model ensembles reinforces the same point for stochastic reasoning systems. Denisov-Blanch et al. find that polling-style aggregation for truthfulness can fail to im-prove over a single sample and can amplify shared miscon-ceptions when model errors are correlated [15]. Turkmen et al. model correlated errors in LLM ensembles and report saturation effects that limit majority-vote gains relative to independence-based expectations [16]. Code-generation stud-ies point in the same direction: the Code Triangle study re-ports clustered errors and limited diversity in LLM code im-plementations, with model mixtures improving robustness but not eliminating the need to measure failure concentration [17]. These results do not establish a universal law about all val-idators; they motivate why EBFT tracks concentration rather than relying on diversity labels. 

2.5 Probabilistic Fault Models 

Probability already appears in consensus, but usually at the protocol layer. Randomized Byzantine agreement uses ran-dom choices to obtain progress or probabilistic guarantees under adversarial scheduling [18]. ProBFT takes a different but still protocol-level route: it uses probabilistic Byzantine quorums and verifiable random functions to reduce communi-cation while guaranteeing safety and liveness with high proba-bility in a partially synchronous permissioned setting [19]. In such systems, probability concerns quorum sampling, leader or committee selection, message complexity, or the chance that the protocol’s safety and liveness conditions hold. EBFT uses probability for a different object. The protocol messages may be deterministic, authenticated, and correctly sampled; the uncertainty lies in the semantic endorsement pro-duced by validators whose reasoning procedures may share data, tools, prompts, model lineages, or latent assumptions. Probabilistic quorum sampling asks whether enough protocol-compliant participants are sampled or intersect. Probabilistic semantic analysis asks how much protocol-compliant support may endorse the same invalid transition. 

2.6 Stochastic Semantic Validation 

The systems considered here place a semantic-certificate layer between a candidate transition and execution. Validators do not merely check syntax or a locally decidable predicate; they may inspect evidence, retrieve context, summarize policies, call tools, or infer whether a proposed transition satisfies an application-level invariant. This is the setting in which exter-nal validity becomes stochastic semantic validation. 3Table 1: Fault capabilities relevant to protocol agreement, semantic certificate validity, and liveness. Authentication means messages are attributable to the signing identity; a Byzantine validator may still possess valid credentials and signatures.                                                   

> Fault model Auth. Protocol compliant May equivo-cate May falsely endorse Threatens agreement Threatens semantic certificate validity Threatens liveness Relevant correlation assumption Byzantine faults YNYYYYYByzantine identities may coordinate or collude; no independence is assumed. Crash or omission faults YCNNNNYTiming, availability, or omission failures may share infrastructure causes. Benign faults YCNNNNCBenign behavior may reduce usable support but does not create false endorsement. Epistemic faults YYNYNCCSemantic errors may arise from model, prompt, retrieval, evidence, tool, or provider overlap. Coherent epistemic faults YYNYNYCShared semantic failure domains concentrate support on one invalid result. Dispersive epistemic faults YYNCNCYErrors, abstentions, rejections, timeouts, or divergent classes fail to concentrate into one certificate.
> Legend: Y = yes; N = no; C = conditional on the fault instance or system assumptions.

The relevant failure mode is therefore certificate-level con-centration. A single erroneous validator can be harmless if other validators reject or abstain. Many erroneous validators can be a liveness problem if their errors scatter across incom-patible classes. The safety-relevant event is more specific: enough protocol-compliant validators endorse the same se-mantically invalid transition to make it certificate-eligible. The gap is therefore precise: existing work does not give a certificate-level model for the upper-tail weight of protocol-compliant validators endorsing the same semantically invalid transition. 

# 3 System and Semantic Model 

3.1 Participants, Network, and Corruption 

The base model is a semantic-certificate protocol for admitting one proposed transition. Let R = {1, . . . , N } be the replica set. The Byzantine set is B ⊆ R, with |B| ≤ f , and the protocol-compliant validator set is 

H = R \ B.

Thus B ∩ H = ∅ and B ∪ H = R. Validators have equal weight in the base model: each identity contributes one unit of support to a certificate, and a quorum threshold is an integer 

q.Channels are authenticated and the network is partially synchronous in the standard sense used by many BFT pro-tocols [8, 9]. The first quorum theorem uses static Byzan-tine corruption: B is fixed for the execution under analysis. Byzantine validators may coordinate, equivocate, withhold messages, or send arbitrary protocol messages subject only to authentication. Validators in H are protocol-compliant and non-equivocating in the base model, but they may be epistemi-cally faulty: their semantic reasoning may incorrectly endorse an invalid transition or incorrectly reject a valid one. 

3.2 Admission Instances 

An admission instance begins when a proposer submits a candidate transition x ∈ X for a state or context s ∈ S. Ev-ery protocol-compliant validator receives the same canonical evidence package 

hs = h(s, evidence , policy ),

which binds the state/context, the evidence supplied for se-mantic assessment, and the policy under which the assess-ment is made. The instance identity contains the protocol view or round, a digest of x, the state/context identifier, and the evidence-package identity hs.Evidence-package identity is a protocol condition, not a semantic claim. A validator in H treats two requests as the same admission instance only when their view, candidate di-gest, state/context identifier, and hs agree. If these fields are inconsistent, the validator rejects or abstains according to the protocol. Context consistency therefore prevents protocol-compliant validators from combining judgments about differ-ent evidence packages into one certificate, while still allowing Byzantine validators to equivocate. 

3.3 Semantic Validity and Classes 

Let V : X × S → { 0, 1} be the application semantic-validity predicate. The predicate represents the application-level con-dition that a transition must satisfy before execution. It need not be cheaply decidable by the ordering protocol. V(x, s ) is a specification-level semantic truth predicate used for analysis; a deployment may only approximate, certify, or estimate it through deterministic verifiers, executable tests, model check-ing, adjudication, or calibrated labels. 

Definition 3.1 (Semantic validity) . A candidate transition x

is semantically valid in context s if V(x, s ) = 1 . It is semanti-cally invalid if V(x, s ) = 0 .4Table 2: Notation used for the EBFT model.                                                   

> Symbol Meaning
> RReplica or validator set.
> BByzantine validator set, with |B| ≤ f.
> HProtocol-compliant validator set, H=R\B.
> NNumber of validators, or total validator weight in a weighted generalization.
> fBound on arbitrary Byzantine validators.
> qSignature threshold for a semantic certificate.
> eδSemantic-safety budget value: a confidence-indexed bound on coherent false endorsement outside the Byzantine set.
> uϵLiveness budget value: a confidence-indexed bound on protocol-compliant support unusable for liveness.
> EδEvent on which false-endorsement weight is bounded by eδ.
> UϵEvent on which unusable support is bounded by uϵ.
> beδEmpirical estimate of eδfrom calibration data.
> buϵEmpirical estimate of uϵfrom calibration data.
> be+
> δUpper confidence endpoint for eδused in threshold selection.
> bu+
> ϵUpper confidence endpoint for uϵused in threshold selection.
> sSystem state or semantic context.
> xCandidate transition submitted for semantic certification.
> V(x, s )Semantic-validity predicate for candidate xin context s.
> πs(x)Semantic canonicalization function for context s.
> FS(x, s )False-endorsement weight among protocol-compliant validators in committee S.
> US(x, s )Unusable protocol-compliant support for a valid candidate.
> CS(s)Class-level coherent invalid support in the proposal-generation extension.
> δ, ϵ Permitted upper-tail probabilities for semantic safety and liveness budgets.

The model does not assume uniqueness of valid candidates. For the same context s, several distinct transitions may satisfy 

V(x, s ) = 1 . The certificate protocol admits or rejects the submitted candidate x; it does not by itself prove that x is the only valid transition available. 

Definition 3.2 (Semantic equivalence) . For a fixed context 

s, two candidates x and y are semantically equivalent if they induce the same application-relevant outcome. We write 

πs(x) = πs(y) when a deterministic canonicalization func-tion maps them to the same semantic class. 

Assumption 3.3 (Deterministic canonicalization) . For a fixed context and evidence package, πs is deterministic and equiva-lent application-relevant outcomes map to the same canonical representative. The assumption is application-specific and must be justified by the certificate schema used by a deploy-ment. 

3.4 Signed Judgments and Certificates 

A validator returns a signed structured judgment 

Ji = ⟨i, view , digest (x), s, h s, a i, c i, d i, p i⟩σi ,

where ai ∈ { endorse , reject , abstain } is the validator action, 

ci is the reported semantic class, di is the evidence digest actually used by the validator, pi is a provenance record for the semantic assessment, and σi is the validator’s signature. For abstentions, the semantic class may be ⊥ if the validator cannot assign a class. For endorse or reject judgments, the class must be computed for the submitted candidate and the bound evidence package. A semantic certificate for (s, x, h s) is a set Q of signed judgments from distinct validators such that |Q| ≥ q, ev-ery judgment has action endorse , and all judgments agree on the view, candidate digest, state/context identifier, evidence-package identity, and reported semantic class. We write 

QH = Q ∩ H and QB = Q ∩ B; these subsets are disjoint and Q = QH ∪QB. A certificate may contain both Byzantine and protocol-compliant validators. It may also contain valida-tors that share model lineage, retrieval systems, tools, training data, or operational provenance; such overlap is captured by the stochastic semantic-fault model, not by identity overlap in B and H.

3.5 Fault, Randomness, and Adversary Model 

Only Byzantine validators may equivocate in the base model. A protocol-compliant validator in H signs at most one judg-ment for a given admission instance. Epistemic faults are therefore semantic, not protocol faults: an epistemically faulty validator follows the message format, signature rules, evi-dence binding, and non-equivocation rule, but may endorse a candidate with V(x, s ) = 0 or reject a candidate with 

V(x, s ) = 1 .Probabilities are taken over an explicit semantic-validation probability space. The sample space may include a work-load or task distribution over states, candidates, evidence, and policies; validator-local randomness; retrieval and tool ran-domness; model versions and configuration choices; and la-tent common-mode variables that induce correlated semantic errors. These sources need not be independent. When the anal-ysis conditions on a fixed admission instance (s, x, h s), prob-abilities describe the validator and environment randomness for that instance. When the analysis averages over a workload distribution, the workload distribution must be named and the resulting bound is a workload-level statement rather than a per-context guarantee. 5The adversary is worst-case with respect to Byzantine be-havior, message scheduling before the synchrony bound, and the contents of Byzantine judgments. Unless a theorem states otherwise, the adversary may choose the Byzantine set subject to |B| ≤ f and may choose messages for Byzantine valida-tors, but probability statements about H are conditional on the fixed context and evidence package under analysis. If an ad-versary is also allowed to select the task, context, or evidence package after observing model or workload information, the corresponding stochastic bound must hold uniformly over that selection or be explicitly stated as an average-case workload bound. 

3.6 Properties 

The following properties are intentionally separated because EBFT concerns the gap between protocol agreement and semantic correctness. 

Definition 3.4 (Agreement) . Agreement holds when two protocol-compliant replicas do not decide different certificates for the same log position or admission instance. 

Definition 3.5 (Semantic certificate validity) . Semantic cer-tificate validity holds when every certificate accepted for can-didate x in context s satisfies V(x, s ) = 1 .

Definition 3.6 (Conventional external validity) . Conventional external validity holds when every decided certificate satis-fies the protocol’s deterministic admissibility predicate: well-formed signed judgments, distinct validator identities, thresh-old q, agreement on the candidate digest, context, evidence-package identity, view, and required action. This property is syntactic and certificate-level; it does not by itself imply 

V(x, s ) = 1 .

Definition 3.7 (Liveness) . Liveness holds when, after the net-work stabilizes, a semantically valid candidate submitted with a consistent evidence package eventually obtains a certificate whenever at least q protocol-compliant validators return us-able endorsements under the fault and stochastic-assessment assumptions. 

Definition 3.8 (Execution safety) . Execution safety holds when applying the certified transition preserves the applica-tion’s safety invariant. Semantic certificate validity implies execution safety only when the chosen predicate V is strong enough to encode the relevant invariant-preservation condi-tion. 

Definition 3.9 (Consensus properties) . For reference, this pa-per uses agreement, semantic certificate validity, conventional external validity, liveness, and execution safety in the senses defined above. 

3.7 Generative Proposal Extension 

Some semantic-validation systems ask validators to gener-ate candidate transitions rather than only assess a proposer-supplied transition. That is a separate extension of the base admission model. In the extension, validator i may output a proposed transition xi or a proposed semantic class after receiving the task, context, evidence, and policy. Coherent invalid support can then be measured over the multiset of generated transitions or classes, as in the notation used for semantic-fault concentration in Section 4. The extension inherits the same sets B and H, the same au-thenticated and partially synchronous network, and the same non-equivocation requirement for protocol-compliant valida-tors. It additionally requires an explicit proposal aggregation rule, canonicalization rule, and evidence-binding rule before it can be used in a quorum theorem. Unless a result names this extension, the paper’s base admission results concern a fixed candidate x submitted by a proposer and judged by validators through signed endorse, reject, or abstain messages. 

# 4 The Honest Quorum Problem and Epistemic Fault Model 

Section 3 fixes an admission instance in which validators judge a proposer-supplied candidate transition x for context s.For a committee S ⊆ R, write HS = S ∩ H for the protocol-compliant validators in the committee. In the equal-weight base model wi = 1 for all i ∈ S; the notation below keeps weights only to make the weighted generalization explicit. For each protocol-compliant validator i ∈ HS , let Ji(x, s )

be the random structured judgment returned for the admission instance. Its action component is one of endorse , reject , or 

abstain , and its randomness is taken over the probability space described in Section 3: validator-local randomness, retrieval and tool randomness, model versions, and latent common-mode variables. Byzantine validators are not sampled by this semantic error process; they remain worst-case protocol ad-versaries. 

4.1 Honest Quorums and Epistemic Faults Definition 4.1 (The Honest Quorum Problem) . A semantic-certificate protocol exhibits the Honest Quorum Problem when there exists an admission instance (x, s, h s) with 

V(x, s ) = 0 and a set Q ⊆ H of authenticated, responsive, non-equivocating, and protocol-compliant validators such that 

|Q| ≥ q and every validator in Q returns a signed endorse-ment for the same candidate, context, evidence-package iden-tity, and semantic class. The quorum is honest at the identity, communication, and protocol layers, not necessarily at the semantic layer; the failure is that protocol agreement does not establish semantic validity. 6Definition 4.2 (Epistemic fault) . An epistemic fault is a semantically incorrect judgment generated by a validator in H: the validator follows the protocol interface and non-equivocation rule, but endorses a semantically invalid candi-date, rejects a semantically valid candidate, abstains where usable support is required, or returns a divergent semantic class for the bound evidence package. 

Definition 4.3 (Coherent and dispersive epistemic faults) .

A coherent epistemic fault occurs when multiple protocol-compliant validators converge on the same invalid semantic judgment or endorsement. A dispersive epistemic fault occurs when erroneous, abstaining, rejecting, timed-out, divergent, or uncertain judgments do not concentrate enough support on one invalid result to form an unsafe certificate, but may reduce liveness. 

4.2 False Endorsement and Semantic-Safety Budgets Definition 4.4 (False-endorsement weight) . For an invalid candidate x in context s, the false-endorsement weight outside the Byzantine set is 

FS (x, s ) = X

> i∈HS

wi 1FE  

> i

(x, s ). (4.1) Here 1FE  

> i

(x, s ) = 1 exactly when Ji(x, s ) = endorse and 

V(x, s ) = 0 , and is zero otherwise. The summation is over HS , not over all validators, so FS

excludes Byzantine support by definition. Any theorem that combines Byzantine behavior with semantic failures must add the Byzantine budget separately and state the conditioning event under which the stochastic budget holds. 

Definition 4.5 (Pointwise semantic-safety budget) . For an in-valid admission instance (x, s ), the pointwise semantic-safety budget at confidence 1 − δ is 

eδ (S; x, s ) = inf {e : P[FS (x, s ) > e | x, s, h s] ≤ δ} .

(4.2) 

Definition 4.6 (Workload semantic-safety budget) . For a workload support or distribution D, the workload-level semantic-safety budget is 

eδ (S, D ) = inf 

e : P

 sup 

> (x,s )∈D
> V(x,s )=0

FS (x, s ) > e 

 ≤ δ

 .

(4.3) The probability in Equation 4.3 must be read with its sam-pling convention. A pointwise guarantee conditions on a fixed 

(x, s, h s); an average-case guarantee additionally samples from the workload distribution D; a uniform guarantee re-quires the bound to hold over every admissible context in the stated support. A workload-average guarantee can be invali-dated by adversarial task selection: if an adversary chooses contexts after observing validator families, prompts, retrieval sources, or model versions, rare high-risk contexts may be selected more often than their workload probability indicates. 

4.3 Unusable Support and Liveness Budgets 

Semantic safety is not liveness. A committee may have small 

eδ (S, D ) because few protocol-compliant validators falsely endorse invalid candidates, while still failing to certify valid candidates because many protocol-compliant validators re-ject, abstain, time out, disagree on the semantic class, or fail canonicalization. 

Definition 4.7 (Unusable support) . For a valid candidate x in context s, let Ui(x, s ) = 1 when validator i ∈ HS produces support that cannot be used in an endorsement certificate. Unusable support includes false rejection, abstention, timeout, divergent semantic output for the bound evidence package, and canonicalization failure. The total unusable support is 

US (x, s ) = X

> i∈HS

wiUi(x, s ), V(x, s ) = 1 . (4.4) 

Definition 4.8 (Liveness budget) . For a workload support or distribution D, the confidence-indexed liveness budget is 

uϵ(S, D ) = inf 

u : P

 sup 

> (x,s )∈D
> V(x,s )=1

US (x, s ) > u 

 ≤ ϵ

 .

(4.5) 

4.4 Confidence Events and Calibration Scope 

Both eδ (S, D ) and uϵ(S, D ) depend on committee compo-sition, workload domain, model versions, prompts, retrieval sources, toolchains, evidence sources, confidence parameters, and calibration time. They are properties of the underlying stochastic validation process, not constants of the protocol. Empirical calibration can only estimate them: beδ (S, D ) and 

buϵ(S, D ) should be reported with sample sizes, stratification choices, adjudication procedure, and confidence intervals. The true budget values remain the quantities in Equations 4.3 and 4.5. We formalize the confidence events Eδ and Uϵ as events over the underlying probability space (Ω , F, P), where Ω rep-resents the sample space of joint validator judgment outcomes 

Ji(x, s ) for all i ∈ HS over the domain D. Specifically, the 7events are defined as: 

Eδ =

ω ∈ Ω sup 

> (x,s )∈D
> V(x,s )=0

FS (x, s )( ω) ≤ eδ (S, D )

 ,

(4.6) 

Uϵ =

ω ∈ Ω sup 

> (x,s )∈D
> V(x,s )=1

US (x, s )( ω) ≤ uϵ(S, D )

 .

(4.7) By construction, the definitions in Equations 4.3 and 4.5 imply that P[Eδ ] ≥ 1 − δ and P[Uϵ] ≥ 1 − ϵ.Several statistical quantities must be kept separate. Marginal error is the probability that one validator gives the wrong action for a fixed instance. Pairwise correlation mea-sures dependence between two validators’ error events. Se-mantic collision measures whether erroneous validators land on the same invalid semantic class. Upper-tail concentration is the probability that the aggregate false-endorsement weight exceeds a certificate-relevant threshold. Common-mode la-tent events are hidden causes, such as shared training artifacts, retrieval failures, prompt vulnerabilities, or provider outages, that can move many validators together. Pairwise correlation does not determine the quorum tail: two validation processes can have the same marginal errors and pairwise correlations while assigning very different probability to a rare event in which many validators endorse the same invalid transition. 

Definition 4.9 (Epistemic Byzantine Fault Tolerance) . EBFT composes worst-case Byzantine behavior over B with confidence-indexed semantic budgets over HS . The safety budget eδ (S, D ) bounds false endorsement by protocol-compliant validators outside the Byzantine set, while uϵ(S, D )

bounds support that is epistemically unusable for liveness. The two budgets are distinct; eδ alone cannot establish live-ness. 

4.5 Proposal-Generation Extension 

The base model above concerns validators judging a fixed candidate. In a proposal-generation extension, validators may instead generate candidate transitions before a certificate rule groups their outputs. Let Zs be the semantic class space for context s, and let Z− 

> s

⊆ Zs be the set of invalid semantic classes. If validator i generates transition Xi(s), its class is 

Zi(s) = πs(Xi(s)) ∈ Zs.Coherent invalid support in the extension is a class-level quantity: 

CS (s) = max 

> z∈Z−
> s

X

> i∈HS

wi1[Zi(s) = z] . (4.8) Here z is a semantic class, not a proposal. This extension requires its own aggregation and canonicalization rules be-fore it can be used in a quorum theorem; the base semantic-safety budget is defined by false endorsements of a proposer-supplied candidate through FS (x, s ).

# 5 Impossibility and Lower Bounds 

The lower bounds below formalize the separation between protocol-visible agreement and semantic correctness. A pro-tocol transcript contains the fields available to the consensus protocol: validator identities, signatures, views or rounds, can-didate digests, evidence-package identities, and structured endorse, reject, or abstain judgments. The semantic truth of 

V(x, s ) is not protocol-visible unless it is supplied by an ora-cle, verifier, or independently justified evidence. A concentra-tion bound does not reveal semantic truth; it only bounds the risk that protocol-compliant validators concentrate enough false endorsement to form an unsafe certificate. 

Theorem 5.1 (Agreement does not imply semantic certifi-cate validity) . There exists a legal execution in the base admission model, with a static Byzantine set, in which all messages are authenticated, no protocol-compliant validator equivocates, the consensus protocol satisfies agreement and termination, and an invalid transition obtains a certificate. This is an existence separation; it is deterministic once the protocol-compliant semantic judgments are fixed, and it is not a necessary condition or a tight threshold result. Proof. Consider an admission instance with candidate x and context s such that V(x, s ) = 0 . Let the Byzantine set be empty, so every validator is protocol-compliant. Choose a set Q ⊆ H of distinct validators with |Q| ≥ q. For each 

i ∈ Q, let the random semantic judgment in this execution be a signed endorsement 

Ji(x, s ) = endorse 

for the same view, candidate digest, context identifier, evidence-package identity, and semantic class. Validators out-side Q may abstain. Every message is signed by its sender, so authentication holds. Each validator sends at most one judg-ment for the admission instance, so no protocol-compliant validator equivocates. By the certificate rule from Section 3, the signed endorse-ments from Q form a conventional externally valid certificate for (s, x, h s). Run any consensus protocol that satisfies agree-ment and termination and whose external validity rule accepts such a well-formed certificate. Since the network is in a le-gal timely execution, termination gives a decision. Since the protocol satisfies agreement, all protocol-compliant replicas decide the same certified transition. The decided transition is nevertheless semantically invalid because V(x, s ) = 0 . Hence agreement and termination do not imply semantic certificate validity. 8Theorem 5.2 (No count-only semantic guarantee without concentration) . Let Γ be any nontrivial certificate rule whose decision depends only on signed validator identities and protocol-visible judgments. If the distribution of protocol-compliant semantic errors is unrestricted, then there exists a validator-output distribution and an invalid admission in-stance for which an invalid candidate satisfies Γ with proba-bility one. This is an impossibility result for agreement-visible, count-only evidence under a static adversary and an unre-stricted semantic-error distribution; it is not a numeric tight-ness claim. Proof. Because Γ is nontrivial, there is some protocol-visible transcript T ⋆ that Γ accepts. Otherwise the rule never certifies any candidate and cannot be a live certificate rule. Let I(T ⋆)

be the set of validator identities whose signed judgments in 

T ⋆ are used by Γ, and let the visible judgments in T ⋆ be well-formed endorsements for a candidate digest, context identifier, evidence-package identity, and view. Construct two specification-level interpretations compat-ible with the same protocol-visible transcript T ⋆. In execu-tion E+, the semantic state satisfies V(x, s +) = 1 , and the endorsing validators in I(T ⋆) return the signed judgments shown in T ⋆. In execution E−, the same candidate digest, con-text identifier, evidence-package identity, signatures, validator identities, and visible judgments occur, but the semantic state associated with the admission instance satisfies V(x, s −) = 0 .This represents the case in which the protocol-visible evi-dence and judgments are compatible with both interpretations because they do not include a sound semantic validity proof. The two executions are indistinguishable to Γ because Γ

is a function only of the protocol-visible transcript, and that transcript is T ⋆ in both executions. Therefore Γ accepts in 

E− exactly as it accepts in E+.It remains to realize E− by an unrestricted semantic-error distribution. Choose a distribution concentrated on the event that every protocol-compliant validator whose identity ap-pears in I(T ⋆) returns the same signed endorsement shown in T ⋆ for the invalid instance, while all other validators return any judgments consistent with the transcript. This distribution is allowed because protocol-compliant semantic errors are unrestricted. Under that distribution, the invalid candidate sat-isfies Γ with probability one. Thus no rule that depends only on counts, identities, and visible judgments can guarantee se-mantic certificate validity without an additional concentration or semantic-grounding assumption. 

Theorem 5.3 (Common-mode replication floor) . Let G ⊆ H

be a replicated model family, and let C be a latent common-mode event under which every validator in G falsely endorses the same invalid candidate x in context s. If a threshold rule is satisfied by the endorsements of G, then the unsafe-certificate probability is at least P[C]. This is a probabilistic lower bound for a fixed committee and static Byzantine adversary; it is not an upper bound and is not claimed tight unless all other unsafe events are ruled out. Proof. Let A be the event that an invalid candidate obtains a certificate accepted by the threshold rule. By assumption, on the latent event C every validator in G endorses the same candidate x, and V(x, s ) = 0 . The threshold rule is satisfied by the endorsements of G, so whenever C occurs the invalid candidate obtains an accepted certificate. Therefore C ⊆ A.Monotonicity of probability gives 

P[A] ≥ P[C].

Adding more clones from the same replicated family may change the conditional variance of endorsements on ¬C, but it does not reduce P[C] or the implication C ⊆ A as long as the cloned group still satisfies the threshold rule. The common-mode event is therefore a floor on unsafe-certificate probabil-ity. 

Theorem 5.4 (Necessity of external grounding) . No proto-col whose acceptance rule uses only agreement signals can guarantee semantic certificate validity for all executions un-less it assumes at least one additional semantic grounding mechanism: a deterministic validity oracle, a trusted verifier, a bounded false-endorsement distribution, or independently justified semantic evidence. This is a necessity-of-assumption result for protocols whose inputs are only protocol-visible agreement signals; it does not assert that any one grounding mechanism is uniquely necessary. The argument is determin-istic. Proof. Assume, for contradiction, that a protocol guarantees semantic certificate validity for all executions while using only agreement signals: signed identities, rounds or views, quorum counts, candidate digests, and protocol-visible judg-ments. Also assume that none of the listed semantic grounding mechanisms is available. Then the protocol has no determinis-tic oracle or trusted verifier for V(x, s ), no probabilistic upper bound on false endorsement by protocol-compliant validators, and no independently justified semantic evidence that rules out indistinguishable valid and invalid interpretations of the same visible transcript. Because the protocol is useful as a certificate protocol, it accepts some protocol-visible transcript T ⋆ for a certified candidate. By the indistinguishability construction in The-orem 5.2, there is an execution with the same agreement signals and visible judgments in which the certified candidate is semantically invalid. The protocol must make the same acceptance decision in both executions because its inputs are the same. It therefore accepts an invalid certificate in the sec-ond execution, contradicting the assumed semantic certificate validity guarantee. Agreement signals alone are therefore insufficient. A se-mantic certificate validity guarantee needs some additional grounding assumption, such as an oracle, verifier, bounded 9false-endorsement distribution, or independently justified se-mantic evidence. These lower bounds show that agreement-visible evidence is insufficient for semantic certificate validity. A system must add at least one semantic grounding mechanism: determinis-tic validity checking, trusted verification, independently justi-fied evidence, or a calibrated concentration bound over false endorsement. Section 6 studies the last option: agreement constrains how replicas order and decide protocol-visible cer-tificates, while an explicit budget bounds the probabilistic concentration of invalid semantic endorsement. 

# 6 EBFT Safety, Agreement, and Liveness Thresholds 

The base protocol is a q-signature semantic-certificate pro-tocol. For a log position or admission instance, a certificate for candidate x in context s is a set Q of signed endorse judg-ments from distinct validators, all bound to the same view, candidate digest, evidence-package identity hs, and semantic class. The certificate rule accepts exactly when |Q| ≥ q. The base model is equal-weight, so N = |R| and q is an integer threshold. Two certificates conflict when they certify different can-didate digests, contexts, evidence-package identities, or se-mantic classes for the same log position. Protocol-compliant validators do not equivocate, so a validator in H signs at most one endorse judgment for a log position. Byzantine validators may equivocate or withhold. The following table separates the assumptions needed for semantic certificate validity, agree-ment, and liveness. 

6.1 Semantic Certificate Validity, Agreement, and Live-ness Theorem 6.1 (Semantic certificate validity) . For a fixed committee and stated pointwise, workload-level, or domain-conditional scope, assume a static Byzantine adversary with 

|B| ≤ f . Condition on the event Eδ , under which every invalid candidate under consideration receives at most eδ protocol-compliant false-endorsement weight outside the Byzantine set. If 

q > f + eδ , (6.1) 

then no invalid candidate can form a q-signature semantic certificate. For integer thresholds, it is sufficient to choose 

q ≥ ⌊ f + eδ ⌋ + 1 . (6.2) 

This is a probabilistic statement through the event Eδ and is a sufficient condition for this certificate rule; no tightness claim is made for protocols with additional semantic certificate-validity evidence. Proof. Fix an invalid candidate x in context s. Byzantine validators contribute at most f signatures because |B| ≤ f .On Eδ , protocol-compliant validators outside B contribute at most eδ false endorsements to any invalid candidate. Hence an invalid candidate can collect at most f +eδ certificate-eligible endorse signatures. If q > f + eδ , this support is insufficient to reach the certificate threshold. Since the argument holds for every invalid candidate in the event, no invalid candidate can form a q-certificate. The rounded condition is the least integer threshold strictly larger than f + eδ .

Theorem 6.2 (Agreement) . Assume authenticated signatures, a static Byzantine set with |B| ≤ f , and that only Byzantine validators may equivocate. This result is deterministic and uses no semantic probability space. If 

2q − N > f, (6.3) 

equivalently q > (N + f )/2, then two conflicting q-certificates cannot both form. For integer thresholds, it is sufficient to choose 

q ≥

 N + f

2



+ 1 . (6.4) 

The inequality is necessary and sufficient for the stated quorum-intersection argument; it is not claimed tight for all possible consensus protocols. Proof. Let Q1 and Q2 be the signer sets of two q-certificates for the same log position. Since both are subsets of the N

validators, 

|Q1 ∩ Q2| = |Q1| + |Q2| − | Q1 ∪ Q2| ≥ 2q − N. 

If 2q − N > f , the intersection has more than f validators. At most f validators are Byzantine, so Q1 ∩ Q2 contains at least one protocol-compliant validator. A protocol-compliant validator cannot sign two conflicting endorsements for the same log position. Therefore the two conflicting certificates cannot both exist. This proof does not charge epistemically faulty but non-equivocating validators as Byzantine. They may make incor-rect semantic judgments, but under the base model they do not create two conflicting signatures for the same log posi-tion. 

Theorem 6.3 (Liveness) . For a valid candidate inside the stated calibrated scope, condition on the event Uϵ under which at most uϵ protocol-compliant validator weight is unusable. Assume a static Byzantine set with |B| ≤ f , partial synchrony after GST, and allow Byzantine validators to withhold. If 

q ≤ N − f − uϵ, (6.5) 

then the valid candidate can obtain a q-signature certificate. For integer thresholds, it is sufficient to require 

q ≤ ⌊ N − f − uϵ⌋ . (6.6) 10 Table 3: Assumptions used by the certificate-threshold theorems.                                                   

> Property Assumptions Threshold condition Guarantee Semantic certificate validity At most fByzantine validators; on event Eδ, protocol-compliant false endorsement of any invalid candidate is at most eδ.
> q > f +eδOn Eδ, no invalid candidate forms a q-certificate. Agreement Authenticated signatures; only Byzantine validators may equivocate; conflicting certificates are for the same log position.
> 2q−N > f No two conflicting
> q-certificates both form. Liveness Partial synchrony after GST; valid candidate and consistent evidence package; Byzantine validators may withhold; on event Uϵ, at most uϵ
> protocol-compliant support is unusable.
> q≤N−f−uϵA valid candidate can obtain a certificate on Uϵ.Feasibility Both stochastic events hold: Eδ∩Uϵ.max {f+eδ,(N+f)/2}<q≤N−f−uϵ
> Semantic certificate validity and liveness hold on their events; agreement holds deterministically.

This is a probabilistic sufficient condition through the event 

Uϵ and is necessary for this worst-case withholding argument; it is not claimed tight for protocols with additional recovery mechanisms. Proof. There are at least N −f protocol-compliant validators. On Uϵ, at most uϵ of their support is unusable because of false rejection, abstention, timeout, divergent semantic output, or canonicalization failure. Thus at least N − f − uϵ protocol-compliant validators can provide usable endorsements for the valid candidate. Byzantine validators may withhold, so the proof does not rely on their signatures. After GST, messages from usable protocol-compliant validators are eventually de-livered. If q ≤ N − f − uϵ, enough usable endorsements eventually arrive to form a q-certificate. 

6.2 Threshold Feasibility Theorem 6.4 (Threshold feasibility) . Assume the same static Byzantine adversary, non-equivocation, partial synchrony for liveness, and calibrated pointwise, workload-level, or domain-conditional scope used in Theorems 6.1–6.3. Let 

qmin = max 



⌊f + eδ ⌋ + 1 ,

 N + f

2



+ 1 



, (6.7) 

qmax = ⌊N − f − uϵ⌋ . (6.8) 

For integral budgets, this is equivalently 

qmin = max 



⌈f + eδ + 1 ⌉ ,

 N + f + 1 2

 

,qmax = N − f − uϵ.

If qmin ≤ q ≤ qmax , then the q-signature semantic-certificate protocol satisfies semantic certificate validity on Eδ , agree-ment deterministically under the non-equivocation assump-tion, and liveness on Uϵ. This interval is exact for satisfying the three displayed threshold inequalities with one integer 

q; the later population inequalities are sufficient unrounded design rules, not separate tightness claims. Proof. The lower endpoint qmin is the least integer threshold satisfying both Equation 6.1 and Equation 6.3. The upper endpoint qmax is the largest integer threshold satisfying Equa-tion 6.5. Any integer q between them therefore satisfies the hypotheses of Theorems 6.1, 6.2, and 6.3. Ignoring rounding, the feasible interval is 

max 



f + eδ , N + f

2



< q ≤ N − f − uϵ. (6.9) For this real-valued interval to be nonempty, the upper end-point must exceed both lower bounds. This gives the popula-tion conditions 

N > 2f + eδ + uϵ, (6.10) 

N > 3f + 2 uϵ. (6.11) Equations 6.7 and 6.8 are the exact integer test; the popula-tion inequalities are sufficient in the integral-count setting and show the corresponding unrounded design rule. For real-valued weights or empirical upper bounds, the floor and ceil-ing formulas above give the threshold check to use directly. If P[Eδ ] ≥ 1 − δ and P[Uϵ] ≥ 1 − ϵ, then both stochastic events hold with probability at least 1 − δ − ϵ by the union bound. A sharper joint probability bound may replace this bound if the dependence between false endorsement and un-usable support is modeled directly, for example by estimating 

P[Eδ ∩ Uϵ].

How to read the guarantees. Agreement is deterministic under the quorum-intersection and non-equivocation assump-tions. Semantic certificate validity is conditional on Eδ , live-ness is conditional on Uϵ, and the two events hold together with probability at least 1 − δ − ϵ by the union bound unless a sharper joint model is supplied. Calibration quality deter-mines whether these EBFT guarantees are meaningful for a deployed domain. 

Corollary 6.5 (Deterministic coherent and dispersive substi-tution) . Suppose a deterministic analysis justifies substituting 

eδ = ec and uϵ = ec + ei. The unrounded population condi-tions become 

N > max {2f + 2 ec + ei, 3f + 2 ec + 2 ei} . (6.12) 

This deterministic specialization is sufficient for the displayed 

q-signature threshold test when the substituted bounds are actually proved; it is not claimed tight for all protocols. 

11 6.3 Conservative Full-Byzantine Reduction Proposition 6.6 (Conservative full-Byzantine reduction) . If protocol-compliant false endorsers are intentionally charged as fully Byzantine identities for all quorum-intersection pur-poses, then the classical condition 

N ≥ 3 f + eδ

 + 1 (6.13) 

is sufficient to reuse a standard 3F + 1 BFT argument on 

Eδ , where F = f + eδ . If P[Eδ ] ≥ 1 − δ, this reduction applies with probability at least 1 − δ. This is a sufficient and deliberately pessimistic reduction, not a necessary condition for the base EBFT certificate rule. Proof. On Eδ , at most eδ protocol-compliant validators can falsely endorse a fixed invalid candidate, and at most f val-idators are Byzantine. Treating both groups as a single fully Byzantine set gives an effective bound F = f + eδ . The standard authenticated BFT quorum condition N ≥ 3F + 1 

is therefore sufficient for the corresponding full-Byzantine reduction. For integer identity counts, this reduction can be in-terpreted conservatively using Fδ = f + ⌊eδ ⌋; the real-valued condition N ≥ 3( f + eδ ) + 1 is a stronger sufficient design constraint. This reduction is deliberately pessimistic. It charges non-equivocating epistemic validators as Byzantine for agreement, even though Theorem 6.2 shows that agreement depends only on equivocation. It also does not express the liveness budget 

uϵ. The main threshold result is therefore Theorem 6.4, not Equation 6.13. 

6.4 Comparison 

Classical authenticated BFT is recovered by setting eδ =

uϵ = 0 . The feasibility conditions reduce to N > 2f and 

N > 3f , so the usual N > 3f condition dominates; with 

N = 3 f + 1 , the unique feasible threshold is q = 2 f + 1 .Basilic’s hybrid-fault model, written here with b for benign faults to avoid confusing it with the certificate threshold q,uses the bound n > 3t + d + 2 b for consensus where t repli-cas are Byzantine-deceitful, d are deceitful-benign (cannot equivocate but can send incorrect values), and b are benign (can only crash or omit) [12]. EBFT introduces a funda-mentally different classification. Epistemic faults are *purely semantic*: validators in HS are strictly protocol-compliant, non-equivocating, and responsive, but may err stochastically in their semantic assessments. Because protocol-compliant validators never equivocate, they cannot sign different proposals or digests for the same log position. Consequently, they pose zero threat to protocol agreement (preventing forks). This explains why the agree-ment threshold condition in Theorem 6.2 ( 2q − N > f )depends solely on the Byzantine bound f , completely inde-pendent of the epistemic budgets eδ and uϵ. In contrast, hybrid models like Basilic must charge non-equivocating faulty repli-cas in their agreement or consensus bounds because those replicas can still deviate from protocol-level state transitions. In EBFT, the risk of epistemic faults is isolated: eδ bounds the safety risk of false endorsements (forming an invalid cer-tificate), while uϵ bounds the liveness risk of unusable support (failing to form a certificate). Probabilistic quorum protocols such as ProBFT use prob-ability to sample or construct protocol quorums while pre-serving protocol-level safety and liveness with high proba-bility [19]. The thresholds above do not randomize message sampling. Conditional on the semantic budget events, the certificate arguments are deterministic; probability models concentration of semantic endorsement errors. 

# 7 Diversity-Aware Semantic Certification 

The certificate protocol in Section 6 does not require a run-time oracle that identifies invalid semantic classes. Invalidity information enters through offline labels, externally verifiable calibration tasks, trusted verifiers, or other evidence used to estimate the tail budgets. At runtime, the admission service verifies that a request falls inside the calibrated domain and then applies the precomputed certificate threshold. It counts signed endorse judgments for the submitted candidate; it does not estimate support for “invalid classes” unless an external verifier separately identifies invalidity. Diversity affects EBFT only through measured reduc-tions in eδ or uϵ for the calibrated domain. Nominal model, provider, prompt, retrieval, or tool diversity is not itself an input to the threshold theorems. 

7.1 Phase A: Offline Calibration 

Let D be the workload domain for which semantic admis-sion is to be certified. The domain specification should iden-tify the task family, state and policy schema, evidence-source rules, admissible tools, expected retrieval corpora, model and provider versions, and the kinds of transitions excluded from the claim. Calibration evaluates candidate validators on la-beled or externally verifiable tasks drawn from D. The result-ing record estimates 

beδ (S, D ) and buϵ(S, D )

for each candidate committee S, together with confidence intervals, sample sizes, the validity domain, and an expiration date. The record also captures model, prompt, retrieval, tool, and provider provenance, because a budget estimated for one configuration need not transfer to another. The true budget values are eδ (S, D ) and uϵ(S, D ); beδ (S, D ) and buϵ(S, D )

are empirical estimates, while be+ 

> δ

(S, D ) and bu+ 

> ϵ

(S, D ) are conservative upper endpoints used for threshold selection. Committee diversity changes the mathematics only through these estimated budgets. A heterogeneous committee is useful 12 Validators 

## Latent Failure Domains 

## V1

## V2

## V3

## V4

## V5

## V6

model lineage training data prompt retrieval evidence toolchain provider 

## highlighted common-mode overlap 

## other shared dependency 

Figure 1: Matrix view of validator identities and latent failure domains. Nominally distinct validators may overlap through model lineage, training data, prompts, retrieval sources, evidence, toolchains, or providers. Red markers highlight one common-mode path that can concentrate false endorsement. for safety if it lowers the upper confidence endpoint for coher-ent false endorsement, be+ 

> δ

(S, D ); it is useful for liveness if it lowers the upper confidence endpoint for unusable support, 

bu+ 

> ϵ

(S, D ). A qualitative diversity score is therefore not part of the certificate argument unless it is tied to one of these quantities. The committee-selection step is a constrained multi-objective problem. For latency ℓ(S), cost c(S), capability shortfall rcap (S, D ), and jurisdictional risk rjur (S), one may formulate 

(S⋆, q ⋆) ∈ ParetoMin S⊆P, q ∈Z Φ( S, D ), (7.1) where 

Φ( S, D ) =  be+ 

> δ

, bu+ 

> ϵ

, ℓ, c, r cap , r jur 

(S, D ).

The selection is subject to the threshold constraints 

q > f + be+ 

> δ

(S, D ), (7.2) 

q > |S| + f

2 ,q ≤ | S| − f − bu+ 

> ϵ

(S, D ).

It must also satisfy ℓ(S) ≤ ℓmax , c(S) ≤ cmax , rcap (S, D ) = 0, and Jur (S) ∈ Jallow , where Jallow is the deployment’s al-lowed jurisdiction policy. The selected threshold is the integer threshold used later by the runtime protocol. The exact integer rounding rule is the one in Theorem 6.4. Calibration produces a signed committee risk profile 

RP =  D, S ⋆, q ⋆, δ, ϵ, be+ 

> δ

, bu+ 

> ϵ

,

CI , expiry , prov , overlap ,

where CI records confidence intervals, prov records model, prompt, retrieval, tool, and provider provenance, and overlap 

records the evidence-source overlap assumptions under which the estimates were made. The profile is part of the safety case: it states the calibrated domain and threshold assumptions before any runtime request arrives. Operationally, the profile is a revocable, time-bound security credential. To maintain safety guarantees under potential distribution shifts or silent updates, we define the following rotation and recalibration guidelines: • Periodic Recalibration : A risk profile must enforce a hard expiration limit ( expiry ), typically set to 30 days. Re-evaluating the committee on a fresh, held-out valida-tion workload from the domain D is required to renew the profile. • Event-Driven Rotation Triggers : A profile must be imme-diately revoked and rotated if any of the following events occur: (i) any validator’s software or underlying LLM weight version changes, (ii) the average response latency 

ℓ(S) or capability shortfall exceeds the SLA bounds, (iii) external audit detects a semantic safety violation, or (iv) the configuration of retrieval corpora or external tool schemas is updated. 13 • Emergency Fallback : Upon profile expiration or revoca-tion, the system falls back to a conservative threshold (e.g., the full-Byzantine reduction in Proposition 6.6 with 

q = N − f ) or escalates requests to a human-in-the-loop consensus path until offline recalibration concludes. 

7.2 Phase B: Runtime Admission 

A runtime request consists of a candidate transition x, state or context s, policy p, and evidence package e. The admission service canonicalizes the tuple into a digest 

hs = h(s, x, p, digest (e)) .

It then verifies that hs and the request metadata fall inside the signed risk profile: the domain must match D, the profile must be unexpired, validator versions and provenance must match the recorded configuration, and evidence sources must not overlap beyond the calibrated assumption. These checks are ordinary profile checks, not semantic invalidity checks. If the profile checks pass, the service dispatches isolated validation packages to the validators in S⋆. Each validator returns a signed structured judgment, 

⟨endorse , reject , abstain ; class , h s, provenance ⟩i.

The runtime verifies signatures, provenance, version consis-tency, and agreement on the canonical digest. It forms an endorsement set Q only from well-formed endorse judgments bound to the same digest and compatible semantic class. A protocol-valid semantic certificate forms when |Q| ≥ q⋆. The service commits only in that case. If no such certificate forms, the request abstains or escalates according to policy; the run-time does not infer that the candidate is semantically invalid merely because the certificate failed. The separation between calibration and admission is the operational counterpart of the two-budget theory. Offline cali-bration estimates how much false endorsement and unusable support a committee can concentrate over D; runtime admis-sion checks whether the signed evidence returned for one request reaches the precomputed threshold. When the do-main check fails, too many validators are unavailable, the risk profile has expired, canonicalization is ambiguous, or evidence-source overlap violates the calibrated assumption, the correct action is abstention or escalation rather than an uncalibrated commit. The next section turns these calibration obligations into an evaluation methodology. 

# 8 Calibration and Evaluation Methodology 

This section details the methodology for estimating, stress-testing, and falsifying EBFT budgets and for evaluating whether the budgets defined in Sections 4 and 6 can guide committee selection. It also includes an illustrative synthetic 

Algorithm 1 Two-phase calibrated semantic admission                                                                                       

> Require: domain D, calibration tasks TD, pool P, risks δ, ϵ , request
> (x, s, p, e )
> Ensure: commit ,abstain , or escalate
> Phase A: Offline calibration
> 1: for all candidate committees S⊆Pdo
> 2: evaluate Son labeled or externally verifiable tasks in TD
> 3: estimate beδ,buϵ, intervals, domain limits, and expiration 4: record model, prompt, retrieval, tool, and provider provenance 5: end for
> 6: select (S⋆, q ⋆)satisfying threshold and operating constraints 7: sign RP ←(D, S ⋆, q ⋆,be+
> δ,bu+
> ϵ,CI ,expiry ,prov ,overlap )
> Phase B: Runtime admission
> 8: hs←h(s, x, p, digest (e))
> 9: if domain, profile, provenance, canonicalization, or overlap checks fail
> then
> 10: return escalate
> 11: end if
> 12: for all i∈S⋆do
> 13: dispatch isolated package (x, s, p, e, h s,RP )and collect Ji
> 14: end for
> 15: if too many validators are unavailable then
> 16: return abstain
> 17: end if
> 18: verify signatures, evidence digest, provenance, and version consistency 19: Q←endorse judgments bound to the same hsand compatible class 20: if |Q| ≥ q⋆then
> 21: return commit
> 22: else if profile checks or consistency checks fail after collection then
> 23: return escalate
> 24: else
> 25: return abstain
> 26: end if

budget calculation. The methodology is organized around four research questions. 

RQ1 How large are eδ and uϵ for homogeneous and hetero-geneous validator committees? 

RQ2 Does nominal model, prompt, provider, retrieval, or tool diversity reduce coherent false endorsement? 

RQ3 Do thresholds selected from the quorum conditions remain conservative for observed unsafe-certificate and no-certificate rates? 

RQ4 How stable are the estimated budgets under model up-dates, workload shift, and adversarial evidence? The task suite contains only cases with defensible semantic-validity labels: executable infrastructure-policy checks, con-figuration invariants, code or plan verification tasks, and con-trolled synthetic state-transition tasks. Labels may come from executable tests, model checking, deterministic policy en-gines, trusted external verifiers, or adjudication records with auditable evidence. Random train/test splits within one task family are insufficient; the design reserves held-out work-load families so that calibrated budgets can be tested against distribution shift. Each task produces a candidate transition x, context s,evidence package, and ground-truth value for V(x, s ). A 14 Phase A offline calibration           

> define domain D
> estimate
> beδ,buϵ
> select committee S
> and q
> signed calibrated risk profile
> D, S, q, expiry
> Phase B runtime admission
> canonicalize request
> inside profile?
> dispatch isolated validation packages
> verify provenance apply threshold q
> certificate forms? commit
> abstain or escalate
> yes yes
> no no

Figure 2: Two-phase semantic admission. Offline calibration estimates risk budgets and signs a risk profile; runtime admission only checks domain, provenance, and the precomputed threshold q.completed study would evaluate the same task by homoge-neous committees, such as replicas of one model-prompt-tool configuration, and heterogeneous committees that vary model family, prompt family, provider, retrieval source, and toolchain. The primary measurements are false endorsement, false rejection, abstention, pairwise dependence, largest false-endorsement coalition, beδ , buϵ, unsafe-certificate rate, liveness-failure rate, latency, and cost. For a committee S and threshold q, the evaluation design compares the EBFT threshold from Theorem 6.4 against four baselines: an independence-based baseline using validators’ marginal error rates, majority voting, weighted-confidence voting with weights fixed before evaluation, and single-validator baselines. A completed study reports the empir-ical unsafe-certificate probability on invalid tasks and the no-certificate probability on valid tasks for each rule. The comparison against the theorem is not a claim that the the-orem predicts exact frequencies; it asks whether thresholds chosen from upper-confidence estimates of eδ and uϵ are conservative for observed unsafe-certificate and no-certificate rates. Rare-event tail quantities require explicit uncertainty re-porting. The report includes the number of tasks, number of invalid and valid cases, number of committees, resampling or concentration method, and upper confidence endpoint used for each budget. A few hundred examples cannot support a 

10 −6 unsafe-certificate claim. If the evaluation cannot resolve the desired confidence level, it reports the weakest supported bound or states that the calibration sample is too small for the target risk. These intervals account for the stated sampling procedure; hidden label-system bias or unmodeled common-mode structure requires separate assumptions. Adversarial tests belong in the main methodology, not in a separate robustness appendix. The test suite includes shared poisoned evidence, ambiguous policies, common prompt in-jection, shared retrieval corruption, and traps targeted at one model family. These tests separate diversity that changes the upper tail from diversity that only changes surface prove-nance. Each run records model-version timestamps, provider iden-tifiers, prompt hashes, retrieval corpus digests, tool versions, policy versions, and calibration dates. A risk profile is rerun or retired when a model or tool version changes, a retrieval corpus changes, a workload family moves outside the cali-brated domain, adversarial tests reveal a new common-mode failure, or a confidence interval crosses a threshold-feasibility boundary. Appendix B gives the configuration and artifact fields. 

8.1 Illustrative Budget Calculation 

To demonstrate the concrete application of the offline calibra-tion phase (Phase A), we present an illustrative calculation over a hypothetical workload of 1,000 simulated cloud IAM policy mutations. This subsection serves as a synthetic exam-ple to show how safety and liveness budgets are computed under Theorem 6.4, and does not report experimental results. The hypothetical workload is partitioned into 500 valid muta-tions (read-only queries or scoped resource descriptions where 

V(x, s ) = 1 ) and 500 invalid mutations (write-authority esca-lations, such as wildcard expansions, where V(x, s ) = 0 ). The calculation compares two hypothetical validator com-mittees with total size N = 7 and Byzantine bound f = 1 :• A homogeneous committee (Shomo ) representing seven clones of a single model-provider family with identical prompt templates. • A heterogeneous committee (Shetero ) representing seven replicas distributed across three distinct model-provider families with varied prompts and retrieval sources. For each invalid task m ∈ { 1, . . . , M invalid }, the calcu-lation counts the hypothetical false endorsements Fm =

FS (xm, s m). The offline calibration phase estimates the epis-temic safety budget using two complementary statistical ap-proaches: 1. Binomial Quantile Bounds : To ensure P[FS (x, s ) >e] ≤ δ, we treat the event 1[Fm > e] as a15 Table 4: Evaluation-configuration matrix for falsifiable evaluation. Empirical outcomes are outside the scope of this design table.                     

> RQ Design Required tasks and controls Measurements and comparisons Falsifier RQ1 Run homogeneous and heterogeneous committees over labeled calibration and held-out workload families. Executable policy checks, configuration invariants, code or plan verification, and synthetic transitions with auditable labels. Estimate false endorsement, false rejection, abstention, beδ,buϵ, upper confidence endpoints, latency, and cost with confidence intervals. Budgets exceed feasible thresholds. RQ2 Ablate one diversity axis at a time: model, prompt, provider, retrieval, and toolchain. Matched task sets and fixed candidate transitions; only the tested axis changes. Compare largest false-endorsement coalition, pairwise dependence, and budget change against homogeneous clones. Nominal diversity does not reduce the upper-tail budget. RQ3 Apply precomputed qthresholds to held-out labeled tasks. Use committees and thresholds selected before observing held-out outcomes. Compare empirical unsafe-certificate and liveness-failure rates with the theorem-bound, independence baseline, majority voting, weighted-confidence voting, and single validators. Observed rates exceed stated confidence bounds. RQ4 Repeat calibration after version changes, workload shifts, and adversarial evidence perturbations. Model-version timestamps, held-out workload families, shared poisoned evidence, ambiguous policies, common prompt injection, shared retrieval corruption, and model-family-specific traps. Track drift in beδ,buϵ,be+
> δ,bu+
> ϵ, coalition size, unsafe certificates, liveness failures, latency, and cost. Risk profile remains accepted after budget drift.

Bernoulli trial with success probability p ≤ δ. Across 

Minvalid tasks, the number of exceedances follows 

Binomial( Minvalid , p ). The upper confidence bound be+

> δ

at confidence level 1 − α = 0 .95 is the smallest inte-ger e for which the upper Clopper-Pearson confidence endpoint for p is strictly less than δ.2. Bootstrap Resampling : To avoid parametric assumptions, we perform B = 10 ,000 bootstrap iterations by drawing samples of size Minvalid with replacement from {Fm}.For each bootstrap sample b, we compute the empirical 

(1 − δ)-quantile be(b) 

> δ

. The upper confidence endpoint be+

> δ

is then estimated as the (1 − α)-quantile of the bootstrap replicates {be(b) 

> δ

}Bb=1 .For valid tasks m ∈ { 1, . . . , M valid }, the calculation counts the unusable support Um = US (xm, s m) (rejections, absten-tions, and timeouts). The liveness budget buϵ and its upper confidence bound bu+ 

> ϵ

under target risk ϵ = 0 .05 are estimated analogously over the sample {Um}.Table 5 lists the assumed illustrative estimates. The syn-thetic homogeneous case assigns a largest false-endorsement coalition of five, with beδ = 4 .2 and be+ 

> δ

= 5 . Under The-orem 6.4 with f = 1 , safety requires a threshold of q > f + be+ 

> δ

= 6 (i.e., q = 7 ). This threshold violates the live-ness constraint q ≤ N − f − bu+ 

> ϵ

= 7 − 1 − 2 = 4 given 

bu+ 

> ϵ

= 2 , so the committee configuration is infeasible under these illustrative assumptions. The synthetic heterogeneous case assigns a largest false-endorsement coalition of two, with beδ = 1 .4 and be+ 

> δ

= 2 .With bu+ 

> ϵ

= 1 and f = 1, Theorem 6.4 gives qmin =max {4, 5} = 5 and qmax = 5 . Thus, the heterogeneous com-mittee is feasible only at consensus threshold q⋆ = 5 . The example illustrates how smaller calibrated upper endpoints attributed to diversity would affect threshold feasibility. Table 5: Illustrative budget estimation ( N = 7 , f = 1 , risk targets δ = ϵ = 0 .05 , 1,000 tasks).             

> Committee beδbe+
> δbuϵbu+
> ϵ
> Homogeneous ( Shomo )4.2 5.0 1.2 2.0 Heterogeneous ( Shetero )1.4 2.0 0.6 1.0

# 9 Related Work 

9.1 Byzantine Agreement and State Machine Replica-tion 

Byzantine agreement formalizes consensus despite arbitrary faulty processes [1, 2]. Partial synchrony and practical replica-tion protocols show how these ideas can be engineered under timing and authentication assumptions [8, 9]. SMR connects consensus to replicated services by ordering commands and then executing deterministic transitions [3]. EBFT keeps that ordering theory but asks what happens when semantic admission is supplied by stochastic participants. 

9.2 Hybrid and Asymmetric Fault Models 

Hybrid fault models distinguish crash, omission, Byzantine, and other failure classes so that protocols can exploit structure below full arbitrariness. Asymmetric and trust-aware variants similarly refine the set of assumptions under which quorum intersections are meaningful. EBFT belongs in this family, but its distinguishing object is semantic concentration among protocol-compliant validators rather than a new network or message-failure class. 

9.3 Quorum Systems 

Quorum systems reason about intersecting sets of participants that can certify state or decisions. Byzantine quorum sys-16 tems make the intersection argument robust to arbitrary faulty participants [10]. The EBFT model reuses quorum reasoning only after bounding the mass that can coherently support a single invalid semantic class. This shifts part of the assurance argument from identity counting to distributional estimation. 

9.4 Common-Mode and Correlated Failures 

Fault-tolerant software has long recognized that replicated im-plementations may share design faults or invalid assumptions. N-version programming and its evaluation literature study when design diversity reduces common-mode errors [13, 14]. This manuscript imports that caution into validator com-mittees. Different agent identities, providers, or prompts do not by themselves prove independence; they are hypotheses about the upper tail of coherent invalid support. 

9.5 N-Version Programming and Design Diversity 

N-version programming proposes independent implemen-tations as a way to reduce software fault correlation [13]. Empirical studies showed that independence cannot be as-sumed merely because implementations were separately pro-duced [14]. The analogy to agent committees is direct but not complete. Agentic validators may share training data, model architec-tures, retrieval corpora, or tool APIs even when their surface identities differ. 

9.6 Probabilistic Consensus 

Randomized consensus protocols use probability to escape deterministic impossibility or reduce expected decision time in asynchronous systems [18, 20]. Their probabilities usually concern scheduler behavior, random choices, or termination. EBFT uses probability for a different purpose: bounding semantic concentration risk among validators whose reason-ing process is stochastic. 

9.7 External Validity and Application-Aware Consensus 

Consensus protocols often include a validity predicate that restricts values eligible for decision. In many systems this predicate is syntactic or is checked by deterministic applica-tion logic before certification. EBFT focuses on cases where the predicate is semantic, ex-pensive, uncertain, or approximated by reasoning participants. The resulting assurance problem is not only whether valida-tors saw an admissible message, but whether their shared semantic judgment is reliable. 

9.8 LLM Ensembles and Correlated Model Errors 

Large language model and agent ensembles are often pro-posed as practical diversity mechanisms. Their value for con-sensus depends on whether errors are dispersive or concen-trated over semantic classes. The empirical literature on LLM error correlation is rele-vant when calibrating committee diversity and semantic con-centration. 

9.9 Agentic Distributed Systems 

Agentic systems combine planning, tool use, memory, re-trieval, and external actions. When such components partici-pate in distributed control planes, their semantic outputs can become part of a replicated decision path. The OpenKedge line frames this problem as governed mu-tation in agentic infrastructure: model-generated intents are constrained by execution contracts, evidence chains, and run-time admission boundaries before they are allowed to affect operational state [5, 7, 21, 22]. EBFT sits one layer below those mechanisms. It treats agentic AI as one application of the post-deterministic model and asks how many protocol-compliant validators may still endorse the same invalid transi-tion. The relevant participant need not be an LLM; it can be any stochastic reasoning or synthesis process whose outputs are admitted by quorum. EBFT can be used to analyze admission rules for muta-tive cloud commands in intent-based governance protocols. When an autonomous agent generates a Kubernetes policy update, cloud IAM change, or Infrastructure as Code (IaC) modification, the control plane can treat it as a declarative intent (the candidate transition x). The governance protocol evaluates this intent against safety rules (policy p) under the system state s using credentials (evidence e). A semantic cer-tificate from a calibrated validator committee can reduce the risk of admitting authority-escalating or boundary-violating transitions under the stated budget and adversary assump-tions; it does not by itself prove runtime safety outside those assumptions. 

9.10 Post-Deterministic Distributed Systems 

PDDS is used here for systems in which participants can be protocol compliant while deriving transitions through non-deterministic or stochastic semantic procedures. The term names a modeling stance, not a finished theory. Protocol-Driven Development and the OpenKedge roadmap take a similar stance from the software-governance side: the durable artifact is not an unconstrained generated implementation, but a protocol, invariant set, and evidence ledger against which generated changes are admitted [5, 23]. EBFT gives that stance a distributed-systems fault vocabulary by separating syntactic protocol compliance from semantic correctness under correlated stochastic judgment. 17 The EBFT contribution is to identify one safety-relevant quantity for such systems: upper-tail support for a common invalid semantic class. 

9.11 Semantic Quorum Assurance 

SQA refers to assurance arguments that combine quorum certificates with evidence about semantic validity. It is the layer at which verifier quality, canonicalization, provenance, and diversity assumptions become explicit. Prior SQA work proposes diverse sandboxed validators, risk-adaptive quorum thresholds, and evidence-backed seman-tic certificates for nondeterministic AI infrastructure [6]. The Sovereign Assurance Boundary places those certificates at the runtime admission boundary, so that execution can depend on evidence digests rather than model outputs alone [7]. Here, SQA is operationalized through the budgets eδ and uϵ and the admission skeleton in Algorithm 1; the new step is to model the correlated invalid-support event that an SQA certificate must make unlikely. 

# 10 Discussion and Limitations 

10.1 Statistical versus Deterministic Guarantees 

The threshold theorems in Section 6 mix deterministic proto-col assumptions with statistical semantic assumptions. Agree-ment is the deterministic part: under authenticated channels, partial synchrony, and the assumption that only Byzantine validators equivocate, two conflicting q-certificates cannot both form when the intersection condition holds. Semantic certificate validity and liveness are different. They are condi-tioned on the events Eδ and Uϵ: the former bounds protocol-compliant false endorsement of invalid candidates by eδ , and the latter bounds unusable support for a valid candidate by 

uϵ.The scope of these events must be stated with the certificate. A pointwise, per-candidate claim applies to one candidate, state, policy, and evidence package. A domain-conditional claim applies only inside a calibrated workload domain D. An average-case claim averages over a task distribution on that domain. A uniform claim must bound every admissible task in the stated class. These are not interchangeable guarantees. In particular, the paper’s statistical claims do not turn semantic correctness into a deterministic property of consensus. 

10.2 Workload Selection and Distribution Shift 

The budgets eδ (S, D ) and uϵ(S, D ) are meaningful only rel-ative to the workload and sampling convention used to define them. If calibration estimates an average-case eδ over routine infrastructure changes, an adversary who chooses inputs after seeing the calibration can steer the system toward rare or ex-cluded cases where the average does not apply. The admission protocol therefore has to treat the domain check, risk-profile expiration, and escalation paths in Section 7 as part of the theorem assumptions, not as implementation detail. Distribution shift can come from the workload, the state representation, the policy language, or the available evidence. A committee calibrated on well-formed policy mutations may have a different false-endorsement tail on ambiguous roll-backs, partial migrations, or adversarially phrased evidence. Both eδ and uϵ need expiration and recalibration after a model update, prompt change, retrieval change, toolchain change, or policy change. Held-out workload families and adversarial tests, as described in Section 8, are therefore evidence about a stated domain; they are not evidence for all future tasks. 

10.3 Validity Oracles and Label Uncertainty 

Calibration separates two error sources. Model error is the actual stochastic behavior of validators: false endorsement, false rejection, abstention, timeout, divergent output, and other unusable responses. Estimation error is uncertainty about the measured budgets beδ and buϵ caused by finite samples, label noise, rare-event uncertainty, and imperfect external checks. A low empirical error rate does not by itself establish a small upper-tail budget. The strongest setting is a deterministic validity oracle or executable external verifier for the calibrated task class. Many semantic domains only provide labels through audits, simula-tions, proofs with assumptions, or expert judgment. In those cases the risk profile records label provenance and uncertainty separately from validator provenance. The theorem can con-sume a defensible bound on invalid endorsement; it does not create that bound. 

10.4 Hidden Common Failure Domains 

Provider diversity is not proof of failure independence. Val-idators from different providers may share training corpora, benchmarks, post-training methods, libraries, infrastructure dependencies, or incentives that make their semantic failures correlated. Even nominally independent implementations can share the same policy examples, parser assumptions, retrieval indexes, or tool wrappers. These hidden common domains matter because EBFT is about upper-tail concentration, not just marginal error. A diverse committee can reduce eδ or uϵ only if it reduces the probability or weight of coherent failure under the calibrated workload. Diversity labels are therefore evidence to be tested, not assumptions that imply independence. Budget estimation is harder with proprietary, black-box LLM APIs. Operators usually cannot audit model lineage, training corpora, or fine-tuning data, so structural checks for common-mode dependence may be unavailable. Calibration uses bounded pessimism when setting the upper confidence endpoint be+ 

> δ

: instead of assuming independence or relying 18 only on empirical averages, the risk profile reserves mass for correlated validator errors. This can be modeled by adjusting the joint error distribution or by applying distribution-free concentration inequalities, such as Chebyshev or Markov vari-ants for dependent variables. The point is not to prove inde-pendence among black-box systems, but to keep the thresh-old calculation conservative when latent lineage is unknown. Opaque provider-side updates should be treated as provenance drift unless versions are contractually pinned or the change is externally detected and recalibrated. 

10.5 Canonicalization and Evidence Correlation 

The certificate protocol assumes that all validators receive the same canonical state, candidate transition, policy, and evi-dence digest. That assumption can fail in ways that dominate model diversity. Shared evidence can dominate model diver-sity: a shared poisoned source, stale snapshot, ambiguous policy reference, or correlated tool failure can synchronize validators that would otherwise reason differently. Canonicalization is also semantic. If distinct transitions are collapsed into one digest or semantic class, the protocol may overstate agreement about the same object. If equivalent tran-sitions are split, it may understate support or create avoidable liveness failures. Runtime escalation on ambiguous canoni-calization is therefore a safety condition: consensus cannot compensate for disagreement about what was validated. Cloud infrastructure intents illustrate the issue. Sup-pose two models authorize access to the same stor-age bucket. The first outputs x1: {"Version": "2012-10-17", "Statement": [{"Effect": "Allow", "Action": "s3:GetObject", "Resource": "arn:aws:s3:::my-bucket/ *"}]} . The second outputs x2, representing the same permission with different key ordering and ar-ray formatting: {"Statement": [{"Resource": "arn:aws:s3:::my-bucket/*", "Effect": "Allow", "Action": ["s3:GetObject"]}]} . If 

πs is purely syntactic, such as a raw string hash, the di-gests h(s, x 1, p, digest (e)) and h(s, x 2, p, digest (e)) diverge. Replicas then bind endorsements to different digests, splitting committee support and causing a liveness failure despite semantic agreement. A suitable πs parses the JSON, sorts keys, normalizes array syntax, and maps equivalent policies to a canonical representation before computing the digest. However, syntactic canonicalization does not re-solve deeper semantic parsing differences. In AWS IAM policies, wildcard matching rules (e.g., 

"arn:aws:s3:::my-bucket/*" ) can be parsed differ-ently by different validators, depending on the SDK version, parser limits, or policy variable evaluation (e.g., resolving 

${aws:username} ). If one validator treats a wildcard as allowing recursive directory access while another uses strict non-recursive matching, they may evaluate different safety boundaries. If the canonicalization function πs collapses these distinct semantic interpretations into the same digest, the protocol might aggregate endorsements from validators that disagree on the actual security implications, violating safety. Thus, πs must either canonicalize at the semantic boundary of policy evaluation or the system must enforce strict parser homogeneity across all validator sandboxes. 

10.6 Adaptive Adversaries 

The first threshold results use a static Byzantine set and fixed committee risk profile. Stronger adversaries require stronger assumptions. An adaptive adversary may choose tasks after calibration, target validators whose provenance is known, ex-ploit a provider update, or corrupt evidence sources shared by many validators. Such behavior can invalidate an average-case 

eδ even when the original calibration was honestly estimated. Specifically, if an adversary can dynamically corrupt or influence protocol-compliant validators (e.g., via targeted prompt injection or exploiting model weight leakage), they can force coherent false endorsements. EBFT models this by transitioning the safety budget from a workload-average 

eδ (S, D ) to a uniform, worst-case bound over the adversary’s action space, or by increasing the Byzantine bound f to in-clude dynamically influenced validators. Lineage poisoning represents a related threat, where a provider silently updates model weights, introducing hid-den correlated failures. Provenance tracking mitigates this by recording cryptographic hashes of model weights or API version tags. However, to prevent silent drift, the system must continuously run canary verification suites on the commit-tee. If a silent update changes a model’s latent behavior, the provenance check marks the risk profile as expired, preventing the committee from certifying transitions until a new offline calibration is completed. 

10.7 Cost of Epistemic Diversity 

Reducing coherent semantic failure is not free. Larger or more heterogeneous committees can increase latency, cost, operational complexity, and the amount of sensitive state dis-closed to external validators. Jurisdictional rules may exclude otherwise useful validators. Capability constraints may also increase uϵ if diverse validators lack the tools, context win-dow, policy language support, or domain expertise needed to return usable judgments. Committee selection is consequently a constrained engi-neering problem, not a search for maximum variety. Diversity is valuable when it improves the estimated safety or liveness budgets enough to satisfy the certificate thresholds under ac-ceptable cost, latency, privacy, and governance limits. 19 10.8 Performance and Latency Overheads 

An EBFT interception layer changes the latency profile of admission. In classical State Machine Replication (SMR), replicas validate deterministic transition logic and can often complete ordering and commit on a millisecond fast path. Phase B validation may require model calls, external verifiers, structured judgment collection, and evidence checks. Large language model inference can take hundreds of milliseconds to several seconds, so semantic certification is unlikely to fit on the same synchronous commit path as ordinary determin-istic validation. Deployment patterns may reduce perceived overhead, but each changes the failure model and needs its own timeout, rollback, and side-effect policy: • Off-Critical-Path Validation : Replicas order proposals via fast-path consensus, but defer final execution until the asynchronous validation phase collects |Q| ≥ q⋆

signatures. • Optimistic Execution : Replicas speculatively execute transitions inside a containerized sandbox with a copy-on-write (CoW) filesystem overlay and transactional database snapshots. If the semantic certificate fails to form within a timeout window, the speculative state is rolled back by discarding the CoW overlay and aborting the database transaction. Crucially, any external side effects (e.g., outbound API calls or physical mutations) are buffered in a secure outbound queue and released only when the certificate commits. • Semantic Caching : Replicas cache pre-signed certifi-cates for frequent or routine mutations (e.g., recurring read-only query permissions) at the gateway layer, avoid-ing runtime inference. Cache keys are indexed by the canonical digest hs. A cached certificate is invalidated immediately under three conditions: (i) the policy p or state schema s changes, (ii) the risk profile RP expires or is rotated, or (iii) any dependent evidence source in e

drifts or changes, ensuring stale semantic judgments are never reused. 

10.9 Scope of the EBFT Abstraction 

EBFT does not say that consensus produces semantic correct-ness. Classical agreement orders values and prevents conflict-ing certificates under the stated fault assumptions; it does not decide whether an admitted infrastructure transition is seman-tically safe. Semantic correctness must come from a validity oracle, externally grounded evidence, a deterministic veri-fier, or a calibrated probabilistic bound on protocol-compliant endorsement errors. The EBFT guarantee is narrower: a quantified certificate risk under explicit probabilistic and protocol assumptions. If the committee, workload domain, semantic-validity evi-dence, canonicalization procedure, adversary model, expira-tion policy, and confidence-indexed budgets are valid, then the threshold theorems translate those assumptions into cer-tificate conditions for semantic certificate validity, agreement, and liveness. When any of those assumptions changes, the risk profile is revisited before the guarantee is reused. 

# 11 Conclusion 

Agentic infrastructure creates a fault mode in which protocol compliance and semantic correctness diverge. A validator may authenticate, respond on time, sign the expected message, and avoid equivocation while still producing an incorrect semantic judgment about an operational state transition. The Honest Quorum Problem occurs when protocol-compliant reasoning validators coherently endorse an invalid transition strongly enough to form a certificate. EBFT ad-dresses that problem by adding confidence-indexed semantic budgets to the conventional Byzantine fault bound: eδ for co-herent invalid endorsement that threatens semantic certificate validity, and uϵ for unusable support that threatens liveness. Nominal agent count or provider diversity is not suffi-cient evidence of fault tolerance. Classical BFT bounds arbi-trary faulty identities; EBFT additionally bounds how much protocol-compliant support may concentrate on an invalid semantic judgment. That is the core lesson of the Honest Quorum Problem: agreement can be real, well signed, and protocol valid while still failing to establish semantic validity. 

# Appendix A Formal Proofs 

A.1 Preliminaries and Quorum-Intersection Lemma 

All proofs in this appendix use the base semantic-certificate model unless a statement says otherwise. The validator set is 

R = {1, . . . , N }, the Byzantine set is B ⊆ R with |B| ≤ f ,and H = R \ B. The base model is equal-weight: N , f ,and the certificate threshold q are identity counts, and q is an integer. The budgets eδ and uϵ are nonnegative upper bounds measured in the same units of support. In the equal-weight model, realized endorsement and unusable-support weights are integer counts, while empirical or confidence-indexed budget bounds may be real numbers. The probability space is the semantic-validation probability space from Section 3: workload or task sampling, validator-local randomness, retrieval and tool randomness, model ver-sions, and latent common-mode variables. Byzantine valida-tors are not sampled from this process; their behavior is worst-case. Unless stated otherwise, the adversary is static: the set B

is fixed for the execution, although Byzantine validators may coordinate, equivocate, and withhold. The semantic-safety event is Eδ , on which protocol-compliant false endorsement of each invalid candidate under consideration is at most eδ . The 20 liveness event is Uϵ, on which unusable protocol-compliant support for the valid candidate is at most uϵ.

Lemma A.1 (Quorum intersection) . Let Q1, Q 2 ⊆ R be two signer sets with |Q1| ≥ q and |Q2| ≥ q, where all variables are equal-weight counts and q is an integer. Then 

|Q1 ∩ Q2| ≥ 2q − N. 

Consequently, every two q-quorums intersect in more than f

validators if and only if 2q − N > f , equivalently q > (N +

f )/2. The least integer threshold satisfying this inequality is 

q ≥

 N + f

2



+ 1 .

This lemma is deterministic and uses no probability space. It is an exact set-intersection fact, not a claim that a full consensus protocol has a matching lower bound. Proof. The inclusion-exclusion identity gives 

|Q1 ∩ Q2| = |Q1| + |Q2| − | Q1 ∪ Q2| ≥ q + q − N. 

If 2q − N > f , then the intersection contains more than 

f identities. Conversely, the smallest possible intersection of two q-subsets of an N -element set is max {0, 2q − N }.Since f ≥ 0, if 2q − N ≤ f there exist two q-subsets whose intersection has at most f identities. The integer formula is the least integer strictly larger than (N + f )/2.

A.2 Proof of Agreement/Semantic-Validity Separation Theorem A.2 (Agreement does not imply semantic certificate validity) . Assume the equal-weight base certificate model with integer threshold q, authenticated channels, and a static Byzantine adversary. Let the probability space be degenerate except for protocol-compliant semantic judgments, and let the chosen validator-output distribution put probability one on the judgments described below. There exists a legal exe-cution in which all messages are authenticated, no protocol-compliant validator equivocates, the consensus protocol sat-isfies agreement and termination, and an invalid transition obtains a certificate. This is an existence separation; it is not a necessary condition or a tight threshold result. Proof. Choose an admission instance (x, s, h s) with 

V(x, s ) = 0 . Let B = ∅, so every validator is protocol-compliant and the adversary has no Byzantine identities. Choose a set Q ⊆ H with |Q| = q. In the realized validator-output distribution, each validator i ∈ Q returns exactly one authenticated judgment: 

Ji(x, s ) = endorse ,

bound to the same view, candidate digest, context identifier, evidence-package identity, and semantic class. Validators out-side Q may abstain. All messages are signed by their senders, and no validator in H signs two conflicting judgments for the same admission instance. The certificate rule is count-based and accepts q distinct signed endorse judgments for the same bound instance, so 

Q forms a conventional externally valid semantic certificate. Run any consensus protocol that satisfies agreement and ter-mination and whose external validity rule accepts such a well-formed certificate. In a timely legal execution, termi-nation gives a decision, and agreement ensures that protocol-compliant replicas decide the same certified transition. The decided transition is nevertheless semantically invalid because 

V(x, s ) = 0 . Thus protocol agreement and termination can hold while semantic certificate validity fails. 

A.3 Count-Only Impossibility Proof Theorem A.3 (No count-only semantic guarantee without concentration) . Let Γ be any nontrivial certificate rule whose decision depends only on signed validator identities and protocol-visible judgments. The variables used by Γ may be identity counts or fixed validator weights, but the rule does not observe a sound semantic-validity oracle. Assume a static adversary and an unrestricted validator-output probability space for protocol-compliant semantic errors. Then there exists an invalid admission instance and a validator-output distribution under which an invalid candidate satisfies Γ with probability one. The result shows that an additional semantic-grounding assumption is necessary for semantic certificate validity; it is not a numeric tightness claim. Proof. Because Γ is nontrivial, some protocol-visible tran-script T ⋆ is accepted. If no transcript were accepted, Γ would not be a live certificate rule. The transcript contains only fields visible to the protocol: validator identities or weights, signa-tures, views or rounds, candidate digests, evidence-package identities, and structured judgments. Construct two specification-level interpretations compat-ible with the same protocol-visible transcript. In E+, the candidate is semantically valid: V(x, s +) = 1 , and the valida-tors whose signed judgments appear in T ⋆ return exactly the judgments shown in T ⋆. In E−, the same visible identities, signatures, view, candidate digest, evidence-package identity, and judgments occur, but the semantic state corresponding to the admission instance is invalid: V(x, s −) = 0 . This is possible precisely because Γ does not receive a deterministic validity oracle, a trusted verifier, or independently sufficient semantic evidence that rules out one of the compatible inter-pretations. The two executions are indistinguishable to Γ: by assump-tion, Γ is a function only of the protocol-visible transcript, and that transcript is T ⋆ in both executions. Hence Γ accepts in E− whenever it accepts in E+.It remains to realize E− probabilistically. Choose the protocol-compliant validator-output distribution concentrated on the event that every protocol-compliant validator whose 21 judgment appears in T ⋆ returns the signed endorsement shown in T ⋆ for the invalid instance, while all other validators return any judgments consistent with the same transcript. The distribution is allowed because semantic errors outside the Byzantine set are unrestricted. Therefore the invalid candi-date satisfies Γ with probability one. No certificate rule based only on counts, weights, identities, and visible judgments can guarantee semantic certificate validity without an additional concentration or semantic-grounding assumption. 

A.4 Common-Mode Replication Theorem Theorem A.4 (Common-mode replication floor) . Assume a fixed committee with a static Byzantine set and a probabil-ity space that includes a latent common-mode event C. Let 

G ⊆ H be a replicated protocol-compliant model family. In the equal-weight case, the support of G is |G| identities; in a weighted variant, it is the total weight of G. Suppose that, on 

C, every validator in G falsely endorses the same invalid can-didate for the same context, evidence package, and semantic class. If the threshold rule is satisfied by the endorsements of G alone, then the unsafe-certificate probability is at least 

P[C]. This is a lower bound on risk, not a probabilistic upper bound and not a tight characterization unless all other unsafe events are ruled out. Proof. Let A be the event that an invalid candidate obtains a certificate accepted by the threshold rule. By assumption, when C occurs, every member of G endorses the same invalid candidate and the endorsements of G satisfy the threshold rule. Hence C ⊆ A. Monotonicity of probability therefore gives 

P[A] ≥ P[C].

Adding more validators from the same replicated family may change the conditional variance of endorsements outside C,but it does not reduce the probability of C or the implication 

C ⊆ A so long as the cloned group still satisfies the threshold. The common-mode event is therefore a replication floor on unsafe-certificate probability. 

A.5 Semantic-Certificate Validity Theorem Theorem A.5 (Semantic certificate validity) . Assume the equal-weight base certificate model, the semantic-validation probability space from the preliminaries, a static Byzantine set 

B with |B| ≤ f , integer threshold q, authenticated signatures, and worst-case Byzantine endorsements. Let eδ be a nonneg-ative count-valued or real-valued upper bound, in units of validator support, on protocol-compliant false endorsement outside B. On the event Eδ , every invalid candidate under consideration receives at most eδ false endorsements from H.If 

q > f + eδ ,

equivalently for integer thresholds 

q ≥ ⌊ f + eδ ⌋ + 1 ,

then no invalid candidate can form a q-signature semantic certificate on Eδ . If P[Eδ ] ≥ 1 − δ, the semantic-certificate-validity claim holds with probability at least 1 − δ. The con-dition is sufficient; for this certificate rule without additional semantic certificate-validity evidence, a threshold not exceed-ing the possible invalid support cannot rule out an invalid certificate, but no broader tightness claim is made. Proof. Fix any invalid candidate x in context s. Byzantine val-idators can contribute at most f certificate-eligible signatures because |B| ≤ f . On Eδ , protocol-compliant validators out-side B contribute at most eδ false endorsements to this invalid candidate. Thus the total support available to an invalid certifi-cate is at most f + eδ . Since certificate support is counted in integer signatures, any integer threshold q ≥ ⌊ f + eδ ⌋ + 1 is strictly larger than that maximum support. The invalid candi-date therefore cannot reach the threshold. The argument holds for every invalid candidate covered by Eδ , so the property holds throughout that event. If the event has probability at least 1 − δ, the same probability lower bound applies to the conditional semantic-certificate-validity guarantee. 

A.6 Agreement Theorem Theorem A.6 (Agreement) . Assume the equal-weight base certificate model with N validator identities, integer threshold 

q, authenticated signatures, and a static Byzantine set B with 

|B| ≤ f . Only Byzantine validators may equivocate; protocol-compliant validators may make semantic mistakes but sign at most one endorse judgment for a log position. The probability space is not used; the claim is deterministic. If 

2q − N > f, 

equivalently 

q ≥

 N + f

2



+ 1 ,

then two conflicting q-certificates for the same log position cannot both form. The inequality is necessary and sufficient for the stated quorum-intersection property; this does not assert a tight lower bound for all consensus protocols. Proof. Let Q1 and Q2 be the signer sets of two alleged conflicting q-certificates for the same log position. By Lemma A.1, |Q1 ∩ Q2| ≥ 2q − N . If 2q − N > f , then the intersection contains more than f validators. Since at most f validators are Byzantine, at least one validator in the intersection is protocol-compliant. That validator would have signed two conflicting endorse judgments for the same log position, contradicting the base-model non-equivocation rule. Thus the two conflicting certificates cannot both exist. 22 If the intersection inequality fails, the set-intersection argu-ment alone cannot exclude two q-signer sets whose overlap is contained entirely within a Byzantine set of size at most f .Byzantine validators in that overlap could equivocate. This es-tablishes necessity for the intersection condition used by this certificate rule, not a global lower bound for every possible protocol. 

A.7 Liveness Theorem Theorem A.7 (Liveness) . Assume the equal-weight base cer-tificate model, the semantic-validation probability space from the preliminaries, integer threshold q, a static Byzantine set 

B satisfying |B| ≤ f , authenticated channels, and partial synchrony after GST. Byzantine validators may withhold. For a semantically valid candidate with a consistent evidence package, let uϵ be a count-valued or real-valued upper bound, in units of validator support, on unusable protocol-compliant support. On the event Uϵ, at most uϵ support in H is unus-able because of false rejection, abstention, timeout, divergent semantic output, or canonicalization failure. If 

q ≤ N − f − uϵ,

equivalently for integer thresholds 

q ≤ ⌊ N − f − uϵ⌋ ,

then the valid candidate can obtain a q-signature certificate on Uϵ. If P[Uϵ] ≥ 1 − ϵ, the liveness claim holds with proba-bility at least 1−ϵ. The condition is sufficient and is necessary for this worst-case withholding argument, but it is not a tight lower bound for protocols with additional recovery mecha-nisms. Proof. There are at least N −f protocol-compliant validators. On Uϵ, at most uϵ of their support is unusable. Therefore at least N − f − uϵ units of protocol-compliant support can pro-vide usable endorsements for the valid candidate. Byzantine validators may withhold, so the proof does not rely on their sig-natures. After GST, messages from usable protocol-compliant validators are eventually delivered. If the integer threshold q

is at most the floor of the guaranteed usable support, enough endorsements eventually arrive to form a certificate. If q exceeds this guaranteed usable support, a worst-case execution can have all Byzantine validators withhold and exactly the permitted amount of protocol-compliant support be unusable. The proof assumptions then guarantee fewer than q usable signatures, so this liveness argument cannot succeed. 

A.8 Threshold-Feasibility Corollary Corollary A.8 (Threshold feasibility) . Assume the equal-weight base certificate model, the semantic-validation proba-bility space from the preliminaries, integer threshold q, static Byzantine set with |B| ≤ f , authenticated channels, partial synchrony for liveness, non-equivocation outside B, and the stochastic events Eδ and Uϵ defined above. Let 

qmin = max 



⌊f + eδ ⌋ + 1 ,

 N + f

2



+ 1 



and 

qmax = ⌊N − f − uϵ⌋ .

If qmin ≤ q ≤ qmax , the same q-signature protocol satisfies semantic certificate validity on Eδ , agreement deterministi-cally, and liveness on Uϵ. If P[Eδ ] ≥ 1 − δ and P[Uϵ] ≥ 1 − ϵ,the two stochastic events hold together with probability at least 1 − δ − ϵ by the union bound. The integer interval con-dition is necessary and sufficient for satisfying these three displayed inequalities with one q; the population inequali-ties below are sufficient unrounded design rules and are not claimed tight. Proof. The lower endpoint qmin is the least integer thresh-old satisfying both the semantic-certificate-validity inequality 

q > f + eδ and the agreement inequality q > (N + f )/2. The upper endpoint qmax is the largest integer threshold satisfying the liveness inequality q ≤ N − f − uϵ. Therefore any integer 

q in the interval satisfies the hypotheses of Theorems A.5, A.6, and A.7. Conversely, no integer outside the interval satisfies all three inequalities as stated. Ignoring rounding, the interval is nonempty if its upper endpoint exceeds both lower endpoints: 

N − f − uϵ > f + eδ

and 

N − f − uϵ > N + f

2 .

These rearrange to 

N > 2f + eδ + uϵ

and 

N > 3f + 2 uϵ.

Finally, the union bound gives P[Eδ ∩ Uϵ] ≥ 1 − δ − ϵ. A sharper joint probability statement would require a separate model of dependence between the two events. 

A.9 Deterministic ec/e i Specialization Corollary A.9 (Deterministic coherent and dispersive spe-cialization) . Assume the equal-weight base certificate model and static Byzantine set from Corollary A.8. Suppose a deter-ministic analysis, not a statistical estimate, establishes count bounds ec and ei such that eδ = ec and uϵ = ec + ei. The probability space is then degenerate, so these are determin-istic bounds. The exact integer threshold test is obtained by 

23 substituting these values into qmin and qmax . The unrounded sufficient population condition is 

N > max {2f + 2 ec + ei, 3f + 2 ec + 2 ei} .

This specialization is a sufficient condition only; no tightness is asserted without a matching lower bound and a protocol achieving it. Proof. Substitute eδ = ec and uϵ = ec + ei into the two unrounded population inequalities in Corollary A.8. The first becomes 

N > 2f + ec + ( ec + ei) = 2 f + 2 ec + ei.

The second becomes 

N > 3f + 2( ec + ei) = 3 f + 2 ec + 2 ei.

Taking the maximum gives the displayed sufficient condition. The exact integer threshold remains the floor-based interval test after substitution. 

A.10 Conservative Full-Byzantine Reduction Proposition A.10 (Conservative full-Byzantine reduction) .

Assume the equal-weight base model, the semantic-validation probability space from the preliminaries, a static Byzantine set, and the semantic event Eδ . On this event, at most f

Byzantine identities and at most eδ protocol-compliant false endorsers can support a fixed invalid candidate. If these protocol-compliant false endorsers are intentionally charged as fully Byzantine identities for all quorum-intersection pur-poses, define the integer effective bound 

Fδ = f + ⌊eδ ⌋ .

Then the classical condition 

N ≥ 3Fδ + 1 

is sufficient to reuse a standard authenticated 3F + 1 BFT quorum argument on Eδ . The stronger real-valued condition 

N ≥ 3( f + eδ ) + 1 

is also sufficient when interpreted as an integer design con-straint. If P[Eδ ] ≥ 1−δ, the reduction applies with probability at least 1 − δ. It is deliberately sufficient and pessimistic, not necessary and not claimed tight for the base model. Proof. On Eδ , the realized number of protocol-compliant false endorsers for a fixed invalid candidate is an integer no larger than ⌊eδ ⌋. Adding the worst-case Byzantine identities gives the integer effective bound Fδ = f + ⌊eδ ⌋. If the design satisfies N ≥ 3Fδ + 1 , the standard authenticated BFT quo-rum argument for Fδ fully Byzantine identities applies to the reduced model. Since Fδ ≤ f + eδ , the real-valued inequality 

N ≥ 3( f + eδ ) + 1 is a stronger sufficient condition. The reduction is pessimistic because it treats non-equivocating semantic errors as if they were Byzantine equivo-cations for agreement. It also ignores uϵ, so it does not provide the liveness condition supplied by Corollary A.8. 

# Appendix B Calibration and Evaluation Methodology 

This appendix gives the calibration record needed to esti-mate the confidence-indexed budgets used by the certificate theorems. It complements the calibration methodology and illustrative budget calculation in Section 8. 

B.1 Task Sampling 

Calibration begins by fixing a workload domain D, a com-mittee S, a certificate threshold candidate, model and tool versions, prompts, retrieval sources, policy versions, and an expiration date. The task sample is drawn before valida-tor outputs are inspected. The stratification records exe-cutable infrastructure-policy checks, configuration invariants, code or plan verification tasks, and controlled synthetic state-transition tasks. Random splits inside one task family are recorded separately from held-out workload-family splits. The sampling record states whether the intended guarantee is pointwise, domain-conditional, average over a named task distribution, or uniform over a task class. If tasks are selected adversarially after calibration, an average-case workload es-timate is not reused unless the stated bound is valid for that selection rule. 

B.2 Semantic Labels 

Each task has a defensible semantic-validity label before it is used to estimate either budget. Label sources include ex-ecutable policy checks, deterministic configuration valida-tors, model checkers, proof artifacts with stated assumptions, trusted verifiers, or adjudication records with reviewer prove-nance. The label record binds the state/context, candidate transition, policy, evidence package, and admissible action space. Label uncertainty is separate from validator error. If labels are probabilistic or adjudicated, the calibration artifact records the adjudication method, disagreement resolution, excluded cases, and any label-confidence interval. Tasks whose validity cannot be established within the target domain are kept out of the budget estimate or reported as a separate uncertainty source. 24 B.3 Empirical Quantiles 

For each invalid labeled task, compute the protocol-compliant false-endorsement support 

Fm = X

> i∈HS

wi 1FE 

> i,m

,

1FE  

> i,m

= 1[Ji(xm, s m) = endorse ], V(xm, s m) = 0 .

In the equal-weight base model, Fm is a count. In a weighted calibration, it is total validator weight. Candidate estimates of 

eδ use an upper empirical quantile of the observed Fm values, with the chosen confidence procedure stated before results are computed. For each valid labeled task, compute unusable support 

Um = X

> i∈HS

wiUi(xm, s m), V(xm, s m) = 1 ,

where unusable support includes false rejection, abstention, timeout, divergent semantic output, and canonicalization fail-ure. Candidate estimates of uϵ use an upper empirical quantile of the observed Um values. The analysis reports the empirical quantile, the upper uncertainty endpoint, and the budget value actually used for threshold selection. 

B.4 Uncertainty Intervals and Rare-Event Limitations 

The reported estimates beδ and buϵ include uncertainty inter-vals. The upper confidence endpoints be+ 

> δ

and bu+ 

> ϵ

are the con-servative values used for threshold selection. Suitable meth-ods include predeclared bootstrap intervals, exact binomial or beta-binomial tail bounds for exceedance probabilities, distribution-free order-statistic bounds, or conservative con-centration inequalities. The method, confidence level, sample size, and stratification rule are recorded with the estimate. These intervals account for sampling uncertainty under the stated procedure; hidden label-system bias, measurement er-ror, or unmodeled common-mode structure requires a separate assumption or sensitivity analysis. Rare-event claims require rare-event evidence. A calibra-tion set with only a small number of invalid or valid examples cannot justify an extremely small tail probability. If the sam-ple size cannot support the target confidence level, the artifact reports the weakest defensible upper bound rather than a de-sired risk number. 

B.5 Distribution-Shift Checks 

Budget estimates are stress-tested against workload shift be-fore they are used in a signed risk profile. Required checks include held-out workload families, shared poisoned evidence, ambiguous policies, common prompt injection, shared re-trieval corruption, model-family-specific traps, and changes in state or policy representation. Each shifted or adversarial task identifies the calibration assumption it tests. A calibration study compares the estimated budgets on calibration tasks, held-out families, and adversarial suites. A material increase in largest false-endorsement coalition, un-usable support, unsafe-certificate rate, or no-certificate rate triggers domain narrowing, threshold recomputation, commit-tee reselection, or recalibration. 

B.6 Committee Provenance 

For every validator configuration, record provider, model iden-tifier, model-version timestamp, decoding parameters, prompt family, prompt hash, retrieval source, retrieval-corpus digest, toolchain, tool versions, isolation policy, jurisdiction, cost model, and capability assumptions. Homogeneous commit-tees identify the replicated configuration. Heterogeneous com-mittees state which dimensions vary and which shared depen-dencies remain. Provenance is part of the estimate. A change in model, prompt, retrieval corpus, toolchain, policy version, provider behavior, or evidence source can change both eδ and uϵ. The signed risk profile therefore includes an expiration date and rerun criteria tied to these provenance fields. 

B.7 Reproducibility Data Schema 

Each calibration run produces a machine-readable record with the fields below. The schema records inputs and estimates, not experimental result claims. • Run metadata: run identifier, calibration date, operator, random seed, code version, analysis-script hash, and risk-profile expiration. • Domain metadata: workload domain D, task-family label, sampling rule, split identifier, and guarantee scope. • Task record: state/context digest, candidate-transition digest, policy digest, evidence-package identity, admissi-ble action space, semantic label, label source, and label-confidence metadata. • Validator record: validator identity, committee mem-bership, weight, provider, model version, prompt hash, retrieval digest, tool versions, jurisdiction, and isolation policy. • Judgment record: signed judgment action, semantic class, evidence digest, provenance record, latency, time-out status, canonicalization status, and raw output digest. • Derived variables: false endorsement, false rejection, abstention, timeout, divergent semantic output, canon-icalization failure, largest false-endorsement coalition, 

Fm, and Um.• Budget estimate: empirical quantile rule, uncertainty method, confidence level, sample size, beδ , buϵ, be+ 

> δ

, bu+ 

> ϵ

,selected threshold q, and theorem inequalities checked. 25 • Shift and adversarial checks: held-out-family identifier, adversarial condition, changed dependency, observed failure mode, and recalibration decision. 

# References 

[1] Marshall Pease, Robert Shostak, and Leslie Lamport. Reaching agreement in the presence of faults. Journal of the ACM , 27(2):228–234, 1980. [2] Leslie Lamport, Robert Shostak, and Marshall Pease. The byzantine generals problem. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems , 4(3):382–401, 1982. [3] Fred B. Schneider. Implementing fault-tolerant services using the state machine approach: A tutorial. ACM Computing Surveys , 22(4):299–319, 1990. [4] Jun He and Deying Yu. The Post-Deterministic Man-ifesto: A new foundation for trustworthy autonomous infrastructure. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.01722, 2026. [5] Jun He and Deying Yu. OpenKedge: Governing agen-tic mutation with execution-bound safety and evidence chains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.08601 , 2026. [6] Jun He and Deying Yu. Semantic Quorum Assurance: Collective certification for non-deterministic AI infras-tructure. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.08021 , 2026. [7] Jun He and Deying Yu. Sovereign Assurance Boundary: Certificate-bound admission for agentic infrastructure. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.11632 , 2026. [8] Cynthia Dwork, Nancy Lynch, and Larry Stockmeyer. Consensus in the presence of partial synchrony. Journal of the ACM , 35(2):288–323, 1988. [9] Miguel Castro and Barbara Liskov. Practical byzantine fault tolerance. In Proceedings of the Third Sympo-sium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation ,pages 173–186, Berkeley, CA, USA, 1999. USENIX Association. [10] Dahlia Malkhi and Michael Reiter. Byzantine quorum systems. Distributed Computing , 11(4):203–213, 1998. [11] Pierre Civit, Seth Gilbert, Rachid Guerraoui, Jovan Ko-matovic, and Manuel Vidigueira. On the validity of consensus. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04920 , 2023. [12] Alejandro Ranchal-Pedrosa and Vincent Gramoli. Basilic: Resilient optimal consensus protocols with benign and deceitful faults. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.08670 , 2022. [13] Algirdas Avizienis. The n-version approach to fault-tolerant software. IEEE Transactions on Software Engi-neering , SE-11(12):1491–1501, 1985. [14] John C. Knight and Nancy G. Leveson. An experimental evaluation of the assumption of independence in multi-version programming. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , SE-12(1):96–109, 1986. [15] Yegor Denisov-Blanch, Joshua Kazdan, Jessica Chud-novsky, Rylan Schaeffer, Sheng Guan, Soji Adeshina, and Sanmi Koyejo. Consensus is not verification: Why crowd wisdom strategies fail for LLM truthfulness. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.06612 , 2026. [16] Yigit Turkmen, Baturalp Buyukates, and Melih Bastopcu. Don’t always pick the highest-performing model: An information theoretic view of LLM ensemble selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.08003 , 2026. [17] Taolin Zhang, Zihan Ma, Maosong Cao, Junnan Liu, Songyang Zhang, and Kai Chen. Coding triangle: How does large language model understand code? arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06138 , 2025. [18] Michael Ben-Or. Another advantage of free choice: Completely asynchronous agreement protocols. In Pro-ceedings of the Second Annual ACM Symposium on Prin-ciples of Distributed Computing , pages 27–30, 1983. [19] Diogo Avelas, Hasan Heydari, Eduardo Alchieri, Tobias Distler, and Alysson Bessani. Probabilistic byzantine fault tolerance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.04606 , 2024. [20] Michael J. Fischer, Nancy A. Lynch, and Michael S. Paterson. Impossibility of distributed consensus with one faulty process. Journal of the ACM , 32(2):374–382, 1985. [21] Jun He and Deying Yu. Sovereign Agentic Loops: De-coupling AI reasoning from execution in real-world systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.22136 , 2026. [22] Jun He and Deying Yu. Verifiable Agentic Infrastructure: Proof-derived authorization for sovereign AI systems. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.15228 , 2026. [23] Jun He and Deying Yu. Protocol-Driven Development: Governing generated software through invariants and continuous evidence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.12981 ,2026. 26