Title: FedMark-FM: Auditable, Risk-Adjusted Data Markets for Federated Foundation-Model Adaptation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.07529v1

Published Time: Thu, 09 Jul 2026 01:17:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 1

# FedMark-FM: Auditable, Risk-Adjusted Data Markets for Federated Foundation-Model Adaptation 

Phat T. Tran-Truong 1,2, * , Xuan-Bach Le 1,2, † , and Minh Nhat Nguyen 3

✦

Abstract —Federated foundation-model adaptation increasingly relies on heterogeneous private artifacts—retrieval corpora, prompts and demonstrations, LoRA adapters, preference and safety data, and update sketches—yet existing federated-learning incentive mechanisms price clients as homogeneous data or update providers. This assumption is poorly matched to foundation-model pipelines, where contribution value is heterogeneous, non-IID, pipeline-dependent, privacy-constrained, and vulnerable to strategic behavior. We propose FedMark-FM (a 

Fed erated Mark et for Foundation Models), an auditable, risk-adjusted data-market framework that models clients as sellers of typed arti-facts, estimates marginal contribution with S3Val (Secure Surrogate 

Shapley Val uation)—a stratified, uncertainty-aware Shapley estima-tor that also supports pipeline-ordered valuation—and converts lower-confidence-bound values into budget-feasible payments that penalize duplication, sybil splitting, poisoned adapters, privacy-budget gaming, and cost inflation. We evaluate FedMark-FM-Bench (the FedMark-FM 

Bench mark) across FEVER retrieval, held-out generator-backed RAG, and trained PEFT/LoRA tracks. Under a held-out prompt-injection poi-soner, FedMark-FM improves downstream accuracy by 7.5–8.1 points over volume, leave-one-out, and FL-Shapley while selecting zero strate-gic clients. Split-conformal calibration reaches full lower-bound coverage at mean width 0.0141, versus 0.33 for naive intervals. We prove that pipeline-ordered valuation is the unique credit rule respecting serving causality, and show it materially changes credit assignment (Spearman 0.76, selected-set overlap 0.67) while leaving held-out task quality un-changed; the market also preserves rare specialists with audit-ready ledgers at 200–1000-client scale. FedMark-FM shows that incentives for federated foundation models can be engineered as auditable data infrastructure that couples valuation, mechanism design, privacy inter-faces, and pipeline-order semantics. 

Index Terms —Federated foundation models, data markets, data val-uation, incentive mechanisms, retrieval-augmented generation, LoRA adapters, data-centric AI. 

1 INTRODUCTION 

Foundation models are increasingly deployed as data pipelines rather than monolithic networks. A production 

> 1

Faculty of Computer Science and Engineering, Ho Chi Minh City University of Technology (HCMUT), 268 Ly Thuong Kiet Street, Dien Hong Ward, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam. 

> 2

Vietnam National University Ho Chi Minh City, Linh Xuan Ward, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam. 

> 3

RMIT University, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam. E-mail: phatttt@hcmut.edu.vn; lexuanbach@hcmut.edu.vn; minh.nguyen244@rmit.edu.vn. 

> *

First author. †Corresponding author. 

assistant, search stack, or enterprise copilot answers a query by composing retrieved passages, prompt templates, in-context demonstrations, parameter-efficient adapters, pref-erence data, and safety probes, and these artifacts are re-freshed continuously after deployment. In cross-silo settings they are owned by different organizations—hospitals, data vendors, safety labs—that cannot or will not centralize raw data. Realizing federated foundation models (FedFMs) at this scale is therefore as much an economic problem as an algorithmic one: a shared pipeline improves only if the own-ers of these private artifacts are paid for their contribution, and they participate only if that contribution is measured and rewarded fairly, at scale, and with evidence they can dispute. Two research lines bear on this problem. Federated-learning (FL) incentive mechanisms allocate rewards for participation and risk sharing, typically through Shapley-based or auction-based schemes over datasets or model updates [1], [2]. Data-valuation methods, led by Data Shap-ley and its efficient approximations, quantify each source’s marginal contribution to a trained model [3], [4]. Recent FedFM surveys, in turn, raise incentives, game mechanisms, privacy, and heterogeneity to first-order open problems [5]. However, these approaches price a client as a homo-geneous provider of a dataset or gradient under a fixed supervised objective, and stop at a scalar reward com-puted after training. A deployable FedFM market needs four properties that no existing method provides together: heterogeneous artifacts must be traded as typed , separately priced products; credit must respect the serving order —retrieval precedes prompting, which precedes adaptation, which precedes safety—rather than conflating upstream and downstream contributions; valuation must scale under privacy constraints that forbid inspecting raw artifacts; and payments must leave an auditable ledger that can be disputed and revalued when the model, retriever, or policy changes. In this paper we propose FedMark-FM, an auditable, risk-adjusted data-market framework for FedFM adapta-tion that supplies all four properties. A client contributes typed artifacts—retrieval corpora, LoRA adapters, prompts, demonstrations, preference data, safety data, or update sketches—and the market evaluates coalitions through a contract utility spanning task quality, safety, robustness, la-arXiv:2607.07529v1 [cs.GT] 8 Jul 2026 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 2

tency, privacy budget, and cost. Its central conceptual move is to stop treating FedFM artifacts as exchangeable players: because retrieval changes the context seen by prompts and adapters, FedMark-FM assigns credit along the contract-visible serving order, and we prove that this pipeline-ordered rule is the unique credit assignment consistent with serving causality (Theorem 1). Because exhaustive coalition evaluation is infeasible, FedMark-FM estimates value with S3Val (Secure Surrogate Shapley Valuation), a stratified, uncertainty-aware Shapley estimator that combines contribution sketches, redundancy clustering, pipeline-ordered sampling, and a learned utility surrogate, and converts lower-confidence-bound values into budget-feasible payments that penalize duplication, sybil splitting, poisoned adapters, privacy-budget gaming, and cost inflation. On real FEVER retrieval, held-out generator-backed RAG, and trained PEFT/LoRA tracks, FedMark-FM improves downstream accuracy by 7.5–8.1 points over volume, leave-one-out, and FL-Shapley under a held-out prompt-injection poisoner while selecting zero strategic clients, and its split-conformal payments attain full lower-bound coverage at mean interval width 0.0141. To make the gap concrete, suppose a hospital contributes a small but unique biomedical retrieval corpus, a web vendor contributes a large but redundant one, a strategic client copies the hospital corpus under another identity, and a safety lab contributes probes that improve policy compli-ance without improving ordinary retrieval. Volume-based rewards overpay the vendor and the duplicate; a naive validation-loss delta underpays the hospital when biomed-ical queries are rare; and a standard Shapley estimator becomes too expensive once each coalition requires adapter routing or RAG evaluation. FedMark-FM instead values typed artifacts under a contract utility, stratifies evaluations by domain and artifact type, discounts duplicate clusters, rewards scarce safety contributions, and audits high-risk payments, while retaining enough evidence to contest a valuation without exposing raw records. The framework is domain-agnostic; a licensed clinical or enterprise case study is future work rather than a claim of the present paper. This work makes five contributions:  

> •

Typed artifact market. A FedFM data market that treats heterogeneous artifacts as first-class contribu-tion units (Section 3).  

> •

Pipeline-ordered valuation. A serving-aware credit rule that we prove is the unique value satisfying standard axioms plus a serving-causal downstream-realization axiom, routing each coalition’s comple-mentarity dividend to its serving frontier (Theo-rem 1; Section 3).  

> •

Scalable valuation (S3Val). A scalable, privacy-constrained valuation algorithm combining contri-bution sketches, stratified coalition sampling, sur-rogate modeling, and uncertainty-triggered audits (Section 5).  

> •

Risk-adjusted payments. A budget-feasible pay-ment rule on lower-confidence-bound values with penalties for cost, privacy, duplication, and manip-ulation risk (Section 6).  

> •

Benchmark and system. 1 A deployed-style architec-ture, benchmark, and stress-test suite covering sybil, duplicate, poison, non-IID-suppression, privacy-gaming, and cost-inflation attacks (Sections 4, 7, 8). 

Pipeline-ordered credit. FedMark-FM supports both unordered S3Val and an ordered variant that restricts marginal-credit permutations to the contract-visible serving precedence, so a retrieval client is credited for improving downstream context while an adapter is credited condi-tional on the retrieval and prompt state that precedes it at serving time. Empirically, ordered valuation changes se-lected sets on FEVER (Spearman 0.7554, selected-set overlap 0.6667; risk-adjusted utility 0.2410 unordered vs. 0.2425 or-dered). A controlled held-out serving study on real FEVER data (supplementary material, 2 Table S15) shows that this redistribution is serving-neutral : it changes which clients are credited so that payment respects serving causality, while leaving held-out task accuracy statistically unchanged (∆ = +0 .004 ± 0.014 ). Ordered valuation is therefore a payment-fairness choice rather than an accuracy lever or an implementation detail. 

Significance. The contribution is fundamentally a data-management and mechanism-design one that matters wher-ever private contributions are priced under uncertainty. A market round begins with a registry that binds each private artifact to typed metadata, provenance commit-ments, privacy limits, and evaluation endpoints. Coalition evaluations then populate a value index with marginal-value estimates, uncertainty, risk flags, and drift evidence. Payments are written to a ledger with formula hashes, budget scaling, and evidence pointers, after which audit logs support disputes and revaluation when the model, retriever, or policy changes. The mechanism-design layer is therefore not isolated game theory; it is the pricing logic in-side a deployment-style data system for registering, valuing, paying, and auditing foundation-model adaptation artifacts. 

Paper organization. Section 2 surveys related work. Sec-tion 3 formalizes the FedFM market and pipeline-ordered valuation, including its uniqueness characterization. Sec-tion 4 presents the system architecture, Section 5 the S3Val estimator, and Section 6 the risk-adjusted payment mech-anism and its guarantees. Section 7 introduces FedMark-FM-Bench, and Section 8 reports the real-data evaluation. Section 9 discusses limitations and scope, and Section 10 concludes. 

2 RELATED WORK 

2.1 Federated Learning Incentives 

Federated learning enables collaborative model training without centralizing raw data, but its practical adoption depends on incentives for participation, computation, com-munication, and risk sharing [1]. Shapley-based reward allocation is widely studied because it satisfies fairness  

> 1. Source code, benchmark harness, data, and reproduction scripts: https://anonymous.4open.science/r/FedMark-FM-3A89. 2. The supplementary material—appendices covering registry and ledger schemas, notation, extended cost analysis, differential-privacy and attestation details, threat models, and full experimental protocols— is available with this submission. Its sections, tables, and figures are numbered with an “S” prefix. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 3

axioms in cooperative games [6], [2]. Other work stud-ies adaptive contribution scoring, seller selection, auctions, Stackelberg games, and collaborative fairness in FL mar-kets [7], [8], [9]. Classical VCG-style mechanisms and peer-prediction mechanisms offer stronger truthfulness results under restrictive observability and reporting assumptions [10], [11], [12], [13]. These mechanisms assume observabil-ity and reporting conditions that FedFM artifacts do not meet: artifacts are privacy-constrained, non-verifiable in raw form, and pipeline-dependent. FedMark-FM therefore uses auditable approximate valuation with explicit uncertainty and dispute logs, and treats VCG as a full-observability reference point: VCG attains higher utility when artifacts and utilities are fully observable, whereas FedMark-FM is built for the privacy-constrained case where raw observ-ability is unavailable. Closest in spirit are privacy-aware FL auctions such as FL-Market , which trade models under local differential privacy with optimal aggregation [14], and sybil-poisoning defenses such as FoolsGold , which down-weight low-diversity gradient updates [15]; both, however, target gradient or dataset providers under a supervised objective, whereas FedMark-FM prices typed FM artifacts under pipeline causality and can host a gradient-diversity defense inside its update-sketch track rather than replace it. These approaches provide important foundations, but they typically treat each client as contributing a dataset or update under a relatively fixed supervised-learning objec-tive. FedFMs introduce richer artifact types and pipeline dependencies. 

2.2 Data Valuation 

Data valuation estimates the contribution of examples, sources, or clients to a model or task. Data Shapley values allocate utility by averaging marginal contributions over coalitions [3]. Efficient variants exploit nearest-neighbor structure, gradient similarity, influence approximations, or surrogate models [4], [16]. DVRL and noise-reduced Shap-ley variants provide additional peer-reviewed baselines for non-market valuation [17], [18]. Recent foundation-model valuation work studies document credit in LLM sum-maries and data auctions for RAG [19], [20]. In foundation-model applications, valuation must also handle retrieval, in-context learning, fine-tuning, preference optimization, safety data, and unlearning audits. FedMark-FM builds on Shapley-style marginal value but treats valuation as an operational layer over heterogeneous artifacts and market logs. 

2.3 Federated Foundation Models 

Federated foundation models combine the general ca-pabilities of foundation models with privacy-preserving multi-client collaboration. Recent surveys and challenge papers identify private data use, non-IID heterogeneity, bidirectional knowledge transfer, incentives, game mech-anisms, privacy, security, watermarking, and efficiency as open problems [5]. FM-enabled cross-silo incentive work has begun to study knowledge hoarding, free-riding, and Stackelberg-style compensation [9]. This paper targets the data-engineering part of that agenda: how to price hetero-geneous artifacts that improve a shared foundation-model pipeline without centralizing raw private data. 

2.4 Foundation-Model Adaptation Artifacts 

Modern foundation-model systems can be adapted through retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), prompt engineer-ing, in-context demonstrations, LoRA or other parameter-efficient adapters, preference data, safety data, and tool traces [21], [22], [23]. Federated PEFT and LoRA studies show that adapter rank, aggregation, initialization, robust-ness, privacy noise, and heterogeneity matter in collabo-rative foundation-model tuning [24], [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30]. Adapter merging and routing policies can change coalition interference, so our framework includes proxy comparisons for centroid merging, volume routing, risk-aware routing, orthogonal-dropout-style merging, and hier-archical merging. These works primarily improve aggrega-tion or global-model accuracy. FedMark-FM is complemen-tary: a secure evaluator can run any of these aggregation rules, while the market layer values the submitted adapters, charges for privacy/cost/risk, and records payment evi-dence. 

2.5 Collaborative RAG and Federated Seller Measure-ment 

Collaborative RAG studies show that shared passage stores can improve low-resource clients, but that irrelevant or hard-negative passages affect both performance and partic-ipation incentives [31]. Privacy-preserving federated RAG such as FedE4RAG learns retriever embeddings under pri-vacy constraints [32]; FedMark-FM is compatible with such systems, treating a federated retriever as an upstream arti-fact to be valued and paid. Decentralized data-market work on federated data measurements ranks sellers with rele-vance and diversity signals without training task-specific models [33]. FedMark-FM treats these measurements as useful priors rather than replacements for valuation: rele-vance/diversity sketches initialize redundancy clusters and sampling priorities, while secure coalition evaluation still determines auditable payments under duplicate, poison, and scarcity adjustments. 

2.6 Structure-Aware Valuation and Secure Incentive Systems 

Recent structure-aware valuation work argues that clas-sical Shapley symmetry can be inappropriate when data sources enter ordered pipelines. Asymmetric Data Shapley relaxes symmetry to respect group or temporal precedence [34], [35], and precedence-constrained Winter values extend constrained-permutation valuation to graph dependencies [36]; our pipeline-ordered value is a serving-pipeline in-stance of this broader family of constrained-permutation valuations. This is directly relevant to foundation-model systems, where retrieval corpora, prompts, adapters, and preference/safety data may be evaluated in an ordered serv-ing path. Efficient valuation work such as Owen-sampling-based FL contribution estimation and data-free spectral-entropy metrics provide low-cost alternatives or priors for S3Val’s sampling and sketch layers [37], [38]. Secure system work such as C-FedRAG focuses on confidential federated retrieval, while FWeb3 focuses on incentive-aware FL set-tlement with Web3 support services [39], [40]. FedMark-FM is complementary: it supplies typed artifact valuation, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 4                   

> TABLE 1 FedFM market contribution types.
> Type Example Evaluation interface Retrieval corpus Private passages Federated retriever Adapter LoRA checkpoint Adapter rout-ing/merge Prompt Template Contract prompt probes Demonstration ICL examples Context selection Preference data Pairwise labels Reward/alignment probes Safety data Red-team cases Hidden safety tests Update sketch FL gradient/up-date Secure aggregation
> FedFM market
> retrieval corpus prompts demos
> LoRA adapter
> preference data
> safety cases
> update sketch
> secure evaluation
> value, risk, payment
> typed registry evidence
> Fig. 1. Heterogeneous contribution taxonomy: RAG corpora, prompts, demonstrations, adapters, preference data, safety cases, and update sketches as typed market artifacts.

risk-adjusted payments, DP/enclave evidence, and dispute ledgers that can sit above confidential retrieval or settlement substrates. Table S8 summarizes the gap. The closest prior lines each solve part of the problem, but FedMark-FM treats the market itself as a deployable data-management layer for foundation-model artifacts. 

3 PROBLEM FORMULATION 

3.1 Market Participants 

The market contains a set of clients N = {1, . . . , n }, a market operator, downstream consumers, and optionally an external auditor. Each client i owns a private portfolio 

Πi = {zi1, . . . , z ik i }. A contribution z is a typed artifact: 

z = ( type, payload, metadata, policy ).

The payload may remain private. The operator may observe signed hashes, provenance commitments, differen-tially private summaries, adapter fingerprints, secure eval-uation outputs, or local evaluation certificates. The operator should not need raw private corpora, private test sets, or sensitive user records. 

3.2 Contribution Types 

Table 1 summarizes the main contribution classes, and Fig-ure 1 shows the corresponding heterogeneous contribution taxonomy. A full deployment binds each artifact type to a separate secure evaluation interface. 

3.3 Contract Utility 

For a coalition C ⊆ N , let Π( C) = ∪i∈C Πi. The market utility is: 

U (C) = wq Q(C) + wsS(C) + wr R(C)

− wlL(C) − wpΦ( C) − wkK(C), (1) where Q is task quality, S is safety compliance, R is robustness, L is latency or serving overhead, Φ is privacy-budget consumption or leakage risk, and K is financial/-compute cost. The weights are contract parameters and must be reported as part of the benchmark card. 

3.4 Contribution Value 

The ideal client value is the Shapley-style marginal contri-bution: 

ϕi = Eω [U (P re ω (i) ∪ { i}) − U (P re ω (i))] , (2) where ω is a random client ordering and P re ω (i) are clients before i. Artifact-level values are defined analogously for each zij . In practice, direct computation is infeasible be-cause it requires many RAG indexes, adapter compositions, prompt evaluations, or secure aggregation rounds. 

3.5 Pipeline-Ordered Contribution Value 

The exchangeability implicit in Eq. (2) is often wrong for foundation-model serving. A RAG passage is upstream of a prompt, an adapter acts after retrieved context is selected, and preference or safety data may only matter after the answer policy is invoked. We therefore define a pipeline-ordered value, ϕord i , by restricting permutations to respect a partial order over artifact groups: 

G : retrieval ≺ prompt /demo 

≺ adapter ≺ preference /safety .

Let g(i) ∈ G be the pipeline group of client i. Let ΩG be the set of client permutations in which all clients from earlier groups appear before clients from later groups; clients inside the same group remain randomly ordered. The ordered value is 

ϕord i = Eω∼ΩG

h

U (P re G 

> ω

(i) ∪ { i}) − U (P re G 

> ω

(i)) 

i

. (3) This formulation is an Asymmetric-Data-Shapley-style re-laxation of symmetry for FedFM markets: it preserves marginal-credit accounting but uses the serving path as a contract-visible precedence constraint. The practical im-plication is simple. A retrieval client is credited for im-proving the context available to downstream prompts and adapters, while an adapter is credited conditional on the retrieval/prompt state that would actually precede it at serving time. The contract card records whether a market round uses unordered S3Val or pipeline-ordered S3Val, and the ledger stores the group order so disputed payments can be replayed. 

3.6 Axiomatic Characterization of Ordered Valuation 

Equation (3) is one way to respect serving order; we now show it is the principled one. We characterize ϕord as the unique credit rule satisfying four standard value axioms plus one market axiom that encodes serving causality. This turns pipeline-ordered valuation from a heuristic relaxation IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 5

into the Shapley value for the layered precedence structure induced by G, in the sense of games under precedence (permission) constraints [41], [42]. A pipeline game is a tuple (N, U, G) with U (∅) = 0 and 

G = ( G1 ≺ · · · ≺ GL) an ordered partition of N into serving layers, where g(i) is the layer index of client i. A value ψ

maps each pipeline game to a payoff vector (ψi)i∈N . For 

∅̸ = T ⊆ N , the unanimity (pure-complementarity) game is 

uT (S) = 1[T ⊆ S], and ℓ(T ) = max {g(k) : k ∈ T } is the most downstream layer that T reaches. We impose, on the class of pipeline games with fixed G:(A1) Linearity. ψ(αU + βV ) = αψ (U ) + βψ (V ).(A2) Null player. If U (S ∪ { i}) = U (S) for all S, then 

ψi(U ) = 0 .(A3) Efficiency. P 

> i∈N

ψi(U ) = U (N ).(A4) Within-layer symmetry. If i, j ∈ Ga and U (S ∪{i}) = U (S ∪ { j}) for all S ⊆ N \ { i, j }, then 

ψi(U ) = ψj (U ).(A5) Downstream realization. For every T , any member 

i ∈ T with g(i) < ℓ (T ) receives none of T ’s pure complementarity: ψi(uT ) = 0 .Axiom (A5) is the serving-causal content: when a coali-tion’s value is realized only once all members are assembled and served, the marginal is emitted at the serving frontier 

Gℓ(T ), so an upstream member that shares that synergy with a strictly-downstream partner draws no credit from it. The symmetric Shapley value violates (A5); it splits every com-plementarity dividend equally across all of T . We state (A5) as a deliberate contract-level design choice about serving-time attribution—the market elects to credit synergy where it is realized—rather than a claim that upstream inputs are normatively worthless; an operator who prefers to reward necessary upstream inputs can simply run unordered S3Val, and the contract card records which rule is in force. 

Theorem 1 (Serving-order characterization) . On pipeline games with layered precedence G, ϕord is the unique value satisfying (A1)–(A5). Moreover it routes each coalition’s Harsanyi dividend to that coalition’s most downstream members, split equally: 

ϕord i (uT ) = 

(

1/ |T ∩ Gℓ(T )|, i ∈ T ∩ Gℓ(T ),

0, otherwise. Proof: ϕord satisfies the axioms. Marginal contributions are linear in U and averaging over ΩG preserves linearity, giving (A1). A null player has zero marginal in every order, giving (A2). Each order telescopes, P

> i

[U (P re G 

> ω

(i) ∪ { i}) −

U (P re G 

> ω

(i))] = U (N ) − U (∅) = U (N ), and averaging preserves the sum, giving (A3). Transposing two clients in the same layer is a measure-preserving bijection of ΩG , so symmetric same-layer clients receive equal value, giving (A4). Finally, in uT a client i has marginal 1 in order ω iff 

i ∈ T and every other member of T precedes i, i.e. i is the last member of T in ω; under ΩG that last member lies in Gℓ(T ) and is uniform over T ∩ Gℓ(T ), which yields the displayed formula and in particular (A5). 

Uniqueness. The unanimity games {uT }∅̸ =T ⊆N form a basis of the space of games with U (∅) = 0 ; write U =P 

> T

cT uT . By (A1), ψi(U ) = P 

> T

cT ψi(uT ), so ψ is fixed once {ψ(uT )} is fixed. Take any T . Clients i /∈ T are              

> TABLE 2 Worked example: symmetric versus ordered credit for a retrieval ≺adapter game.
> Client (layer) Symmetric Shapley Ordered value
> r1(retrieval) 2.0 1.5
> r2(retrieval) 2.0 1.5
> a(adapter) 2.0 3.0
> Total 6.0 6.0

null in uT , so (A2) gives ψi(uT ) = 0 ; clients i ∈ T with 

g(i) < ℓ (T ) give ψi(uT ) = 0 by (A5). The remaining clients lie in T ∩ Gℓ(T ), share the layer Gℓ(T ), and are mutually symmetric in uT , so (A4) equates their values to a common 

s. Efficiency (A3) forces |T ∩ Gℓ(T )| s = uT (N ) = 1 , hence 

s = 1 /|T ∩ Gℓ(T )|. Thus ψ(uT ) = ϕord (uT ) for every T , and by linearity ψ = ϕord .Replacing (A4)–(A5) by full symmetry recovers the clas-sical Shapley value, which splits each cT equally over all of T ; ordered valuation instead routes cT to the serving frontier. Two consequences matter for the market. First, because Theorem 1 fixes the value on the unanimity basis, contracts that agree on G yield identical ordered credit, and the budget-feasible scaling of the payment rule in Eq. (5) multiplies all positive values by a common factor, preserving the within-layer order the theorem induces. Sec-ond, combined with the held-out serving-neutrality result (Table S15), ordered valuation rests on two pillars: it is the 

unique serving-causal credit rule, and it costs no measurable held-out task quality. It is therefore a principled payment-fairness guarantee rather than an accuracy heuristic. 

Worked example. Consider two retrieval clients r1, r 2 in layer G1 and one adapter client a in layer G2, with U (∅) = 0 ,

U ({r1}) = U ({r2}) = 2 , U ({a}) = 0 , U ({r1, r 2}) = 3 ,

U ({r1, a }) = U ({r2, a }) = 5 , and U (N ) = 6 : the adapter is useless without retrieved context but adds 3 once either retrieval client is present. The nonzero Harsanyi dividends are c{ri} = 2 , c{r1,r 2} = −1, c{ri,a } = 3 , and cN = −3.The symmetric Shapley value splits each dividend across all of its members and pays (2 , 2, 2) . Ordered valuation in-stead routes the two cross-layer complementarity dividends 

c{ri,a } entirely to the serving frontier a, giving (1 .5, 1.5, 3) 

(Table 2): the adapter that realizes the retrieval–adapter synergy at serving time is paid for it, while the retrieval clients keep only their standalone and same-layer credit. Both rules are efficient ( P 

> i

ϕi = 6 ); they differ precisely on who is paid for cross-layer complementarity. Averaging the two serving-order permutations (r1, r 2, a ) and (r2, r 1, a )

in Eq. (3) reproduces (1 .5, 1.5, 3) , confirming the dividend-routing form of Theorem 1. Beyond attribution, (A5) has a strategic consequence that distinguishes ordered from symmetric credit. 

Corollary 1 (No upstream synergy capture) . Under ϕord ,client i’s value draws only on coalitions whose deepest layer is 

i’s own: ϕord i (U ) = P    

> T:i∈T, ℓ (T)= g(i)

cT /|T ∩ Gg(i)|. Hence 

i receives nothing from any coalition that contains a strictly more downstream member; a positive cross-layer complementarity dividend cT with ℓ(T ) > g (i) pays i a share cT /|T | under the symmetric Shapley value but 0 under ϕord .IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 6

Proof: By linearity, ϕord i (U ) = P 

> T

cT ϕord i (uT ); The-orem 1 makes ϕord i (uT ) nonzero only when g(i) = ℓ(T ),which gives the displayed sum and the vanishing of every term with ℓ(T ) > g (i).Two operational consequences follow. First, an up-stream provider cannot raise its ordered payment by enter-ing or fabricating cross-layer complementarity, so identity-splitting or collusion aimed at harvesting downstream syn-ergy is unprofitable under ordered credit even before the duplicate penalty of Section 6 is applied. Second, credit— and therefore the manipulation surface—concentrates on the serving frontier, which tells the operator to prioritize duplicate and poison audits on the most downstream layer a disputed coalition reaches. A full incentive-compatibility analysis of frontier-concentrated credit is left to future work. 

3.7 Strategic Clients 

Clients may split one portfolio across identities, duplicate another client’s artifacts, submit poisoned adapters, overfit public prompts, inflate costs, exaggerate privacy constraints, or collude to create artificial complementarity. FedMark-FM targets approximate manipulation resistance under a bounded strategic model: common manipulations should not produce higher expected profit than honest participa-tion after duplicate penalties, uncertainty discounts, hidden audits, and risk-adjusted payments. This is the appropriate guarantee for privacy-constrained artifacts, whose raw form cannot be verified to support exact dominant-strategy truth-fulness. 

4 THE FED MARK -FM S YSTEM 

Figure 2 shows the deployed-style architecture, and Fig-ure 3 shows the dataflow within a single market round. The design keeps registry entries, value estimates, pay-ment decisions, and cryptographic evidence as explicit data-engineering artifacts across client, operator, and auditor trust boundaries. The contract card is committed before submissions, and later disputes replay the recorded hashes, utility weights, evaluator evidence, and payment formula. 

4.1 Contribution Registry 

The registry stores client credentials, artifact type, domain tags, signed hashes, license constraints, privacy budget, declared cost, and artifact endpoint. The registry is not only a database; it defines what can be evaluated and what evidence can be used in disputes. 

4.2 Secure Evaluation Sandbox 

The sandbox evaluates sampled coalitions. For RAG, it builds temporary indexes or queries federated retriever endpoints. For adapters, it loads or routes LoRA modules in isolated workers. For private probes, it accepts signed client-side score certificates. For update sketches, it uses secure aggregation outputs. Each evaluation produces an evidence hash and utility vector. 

4.3 Value Index and Ledger 

The value index stores point estimates, confidence intervals, redundancy clusters, complementarity links, risk flags, and historical value drift. The market ledger stores the payment formula version, utility weights, lower confidence bounds, penalties, bonuses, final payment, and evidence hashes. This is essential for dispute resolution and revaluation after model, prompt, retriever, or policy changes. 

5 S3V AL : S ECURE SURROGATE SHAPLEY VALU -

> ATION

5.1 Overview 

S3Val estimates either the unordered value in Eq. (2) or the pipeline-ordered value in Eq. (3). The same evidence path is used in both cases; the ordered variant changes only the admissible coalition permutations. The estimator has four components: 1) contribution sketches; 2) redundancy and complementarity clustering; 3) stratified or pipeline-ordered coalition sampling; 4) surrogate utility modeling with uncertainty-triggered direct audits. 

5.2 Contribution Sketches 

Each client submits typed metadata and privacy-preserving summaries. A retrieval corpus may submit centroid embed-dings, MinHash sketches, domain histograms, and prove-nance hashes. An adapter may submit rank, target modules, delta norms, calibration traces, and routing hints. A prompt contribution may submit task tags and response statistics. These sketches provide features for valuation while limiting raw data exposure. 

5.3 Coalition Sampling 

Coalitions are sampled by artifact type, domain, redun-dancy cluster, and risk stratum. The sampler oversamples clients whose value confidence interval crosses zero, whose payment would be large, or whose manipulation risk is high. This matters because a market does not need uni-formly precise values for every client; it needs reliable values near payment decisions. 

5.4 Utility Surrogate 

The surrogate gθ (C, i ) predicts: 

∆i(C) = U (C ∪ { i}) − U (C). (4) Features include coalition size, artifact mix, domain gaps, duplicate overlap, adapter interference, safety risk, privacy budget, cost, and scarcity. The prototype uses a dependency-free linear surrogate to keep experiments re-producible; the framework can replace it with calibrated gradient-boosted trees, Gaussian processes, or neural mod-els. Algorithm 1 summarizes the full S3Val procedure. With fixed strata and bounded marginal variance, a client receiving mi direct marginal observations has stan-dard error O(1 /√mi). Thus the LCB width shrinks at the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 7

> Fig. 2. Architecture of FedMark-FM. Solid arrows are data/control flow; dashed arrows are audit/dispute flow.
> Fig. 3. Single market-round dataflow, from contract-card commitment through settlement and dispute replay.

same rate until the stopping rule is met or the call budget is exhausted. The audit predicate is explicit: 

A(i, C, H ) = 1{wi > τ w ∨ ri > τ r ∨ bi > τ b ∨ ξi < h min },

where bi is the distance of client i’s current scaled payment from the budget threshold, ξi ∼ Uniform(0 , 1) , and hmin 

is the configured random direct-audit floor. The direct-evaluation cost is 2|D| ≤ 2M coalition utility calls, plus sketch clustering and surrogate updates; for k strata, a bal-anced allocation gives O(M/k ) direct samples per stratum. 

6 PAYMENT MECHANISM 

6.1 Lower-Bound Payment Rule 

Let bϕi be the estimated value, σi its calibrated uncertainty, di

duplicate risk, ri manipulation risk, ci verified or declared cost, ϵpriv i privacy budget, and si scarcity score. The raw payment is the positive part of a single contract score: 

epi =

h bϕi − λσ i − βc i − γϵ priv i − η max( di, r i) + ρs i

i 

> +

.

(5) Here λ is the uncertainty discount, β the cost penalty, γ the privacy-consumption penalty, η the risk penalty, and ρ the scarcity bonus weight. Raw payments epi are scaled if their total exceeds the market budget. Lower-confidence-bound payment is inten-tional: a high-variance client should not receive a large payment before audit evidence supports the value. Default values are λ = 0 .75 , β = 0 .28 , γ = 0 .20 , η = 0 .75 , and 

ρ = 0 .25 ; Table S11 lists these defaults, and real-track scripts sweep risk, duplicate, privacy, cost, and scarcity settings and record the selected operating point in the contract card. 

Operational scores. In the prototype, di is computed from provenance hash matches when available and other-wise from token/trigram overlap for retrieval passages or train-text signatures for adapter proxies. The manipulation score ri is an audit prior built from hidden-probe failure, duplicate-cluster membership, provenance/timing anoma-lies, declared-cost outliers, and privacy declarations that reduce observability without improving validation utility. The scarcity score si is not a flat entitlement: it is positive only when a domain or artifact type is underrepresented on the contract validation card and the client improves that slice. The privacy term ϵpriv i is the measured DP spend or declared privacy-constrained evaluation budget. The coef-ficient γ is only the unit conversion from that spend to a payment penalty; it is not itself a privacy budget. The prototype sweeps γ for Laplace and zCDP-style Gaussian releases to test payment stability under different operator cost assumptions. Cost ci should be verified when it affects payment. The deployment interface accepts signed evaluator receipts: wall-clock time, accelerator type, token count, retrieval calls, adapter-train steps, DP releases, and enclave or worker measurement. If receipts are unavailable, the prototype treats cost as adversarially declared and applies reserve IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 8

Algorithm 1: S3Val 

Input: Clients N , utility U , strata S, call budget M ,width target τ , stability window T , audit predicate A(i, C, H )

Output: Value ledger  

> 1

Collect contribution sketches and provenance commitments  

> 2

Build redundancy and domain clusters  

> 3

Initialize direct set D ← ∅ , surrogate gθ , widths 

wi ← ∞  

> 4

while |D| < M and max i wi > τ and top-k payments are not stable for T updates do  

> 5

Choose stratum s ∈ S with probability proportional to 1 + ¯ ws + ¯ rs + ¯bs 

> 6

Sample client i from s proportional to 

1 + wi + ri + bi, where bi is payment-boundary proximity  

> 7

Sample coalition C ⊆ N \ { i} from same/different domain and redundancy strata  

> 8

if A(i, C, H ) = 1 , where H is the current ledger history then  

> 9

Evaluate ∆i(C) = U (C ∪ { i}) − U (C);append (x(C, i ), ∆i(C)) to D 

> 10

Update gθ by ridge regression on D; update residual and marginal-variance widths wi 

> 11

foreach client i do  

> 12

Estimate bϕi from direct and surrogate marginals  

> 13

Compute uncertainty, lower confidence bound, duplicate risk, and manipulation risk  

> 14

return value ledger 

checks plus a cost-gaming stress test. In that test, a client jointly inflates cost by 1×–10 × and submits a duplicate; the attacker is not selected under the current contract be-cause higher declared cost lowers value density and dupli-cate/risk penalties dominate. 

6.2 Manipulation Defenses 

Sybil splitting and duplicate submission are handled by redundancy clusters and group-level marginal discounts. Poisoned adapters are penalized through hidden safety probes and manipulation-risk scores. Privacy-budget gam-ing increases uncertainty and therefore lowers the lower confidence bound. Cost inflation is limited by cost penalties and reserve checks. Non-IID specialist suppression is ad-dressed through stratified evaluation and scarcity bonuses. 

6.3 Theoretical Properties 

We state the mechanism’s guarantees informally here and defer formal statements and proofs to the supplementary material. S3Val admits a Hoeffding-style estimation-error bound; under a value-gap margin condition, budgeted se-lection recovers the downstream-oracle set with high prob-ability; budget feasibility and payment monotonicity hold by construction; and approximate incentive-compatibility, sybil, poisoning, and individual-rationality bounds quantify when common manipulations are unprofitable. 

7 FED MARK -FM-B ENCH 

7.1 Tracks 

FedMark-FM-Bench contains four tracks:  

> •

Federated retrieval corpus market: clients contribute private passages for RAG.  

> •

Federated adapter market: clients contribute LoRA or adapter-effect artifacts.  

> •

Prompt and demonstration market: clients contribute prompt templates or in-context examples.  

> •

Preference and safety market: clients contribute pair-wise labels and red-team cases. 

7.2 Client Types 

The benchmark includes high-quality specialists, redundant generalists, noisy contributors, sybil splitters, duplicate sub-mitters, poisoned adapter clients, privacy-sensitive clients, cost inflaters, and rare-domain contributors. 

7.3 Metrics 

Valuation metrics include rank correlation with expensive leave-one-client-out, top-k high-value precision, harmful-client AUROC, duplicate discount ratio, value sign stability, and confidence interval coverage. Market metrics include utility per dollar, budget violation rate, individual rational-ity rate, diversity of selected domains, and regret against oracle selection. Strategic metrics include sybil gain ratio, duplicate overpayment, poisoning profit, prompt-gaming gain, privacy-gaming gain, and cost-inflation gain. 

7.4 Submission and Leaderboard Protocol 

To make FedMark-FM-Bench more than a one-off re-production script, a benchmark submission consists of a signed client manifest, typed artifact descriptors, op-tional sketches, and a score file. Each manifest records 

round_id , client_id , artifact_type , base_model ,

provenance_hash , privacy_budget , declared_cost ,

endpoint_ref , and signature . Raw private payloads are not submitted to the leaderboard. Held-out evaluation uses a contract card whose validation-slice hashes and audit policy are committed before submissions; test labels, hidden probes, and rare-slice membership are not exposed until the round closes. A leaderboard row reports per-track raw util-ity, risk-adjusted utility, strategic clients selected, rare clients retained, audit calls, model calls, wall-clock time, budget use, and dispute count. FedMark-FM-Bench includes JSON schemas and toy clients for specialist, duplicate, sybil, poison, privacy-gaming, and cost-inflation submissions so outside researchers can test new market mechanisms against the same interface. Figure 4 shows the resulting submission flow. 

A runnable, extensible leaderboard. To lower the bar-rier to entry, FedMark-FM-Bench ships as a small library and a one-command harness. An external method is a scorer that returns a contribution score per client, given a committed contract card and a validation-utility oracle that exposes the same secure-evaluation interface every baseline uses. The harness selects a budget-feasible coalition from the returned scores, serves it on a disjoint held-out test card, and appends IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 9                                        

> TABLE 3 FedMark-FM-Bench leaderboard on a frozen 100-client instance: held-out accuracy and operator economics at a fixed budget.
> Method Acc. Util/$ Rare kept Strat. sel. Calls FedMark-FM 0.550 0.126 1.00 0.00 351 Equal 0.517 0.116 1.00 0.00 0Shapley-UCB [7] 0.517 0.117 1.00 0.33 351 Retrieval similarity [33] 0.442 0.100 0.67 0.33 0Leave-one-out [16] 0.108 0.025 0.33 10.67 117 Volume 0.092 0.020 0.00 12.00 0FL-Shapley [3] 0.075 0.017 0.00 4.67 351

a standardized row; a JSON submission schema and the frozen contract-card hash make results comparable and commit-reveal-checkable. Table 3 shows the leaderboard pre-populated with the seven baselines on a frozen 100-client instance (contract 72a9f6c9 ). Beyond task quality it reports operator economics at a fixed budget: FedMark-FM attains the best held-out accuracy and utility-per-dollar while retaining the rare specialist and selecting no strategic clients, whereas volume and leave-one-out spend the same budget on high-volume poison (10–12 strategic clients) and collapse. Because selection and serving are decoupled by the contract card, a new valuation method is scored against the identical instance in a single call. 

8 REAL -D ATA VALIDATION 

8.1 Tracks and Baselines 

We evaluate on three real-data tracks. The first is a FEVER retrieval-corpus market: clients own private shards of ev-idence passages and are evaluated by whether a coalition retrieves the gold evidence for held-out claims. The second is a de-circularized FEVER serving track: each method se-lects a paid coalition using a contract-validation card, then the selected coalition is actually served on a separate held-out test card through retrieve–read scoring. The headline metrics are downstream accuracy, macro-F1, evidence exact match, and regret against a downstream oracle; none of these metrics use attack labels or the payment formula. The third is a trained low-rank adapter validation: each AG News client trains a small PyTorch low-rank adapter, and coalitions are evaluated by summing adapter logits. These tracks exercise real text, real labels, strategic clients, and the major requested baselines. We also add one optional generator-backed RAG serving track. It uses google/flan-t5-small as a real seq2seq reader after coalition selection: the market selects clients on a validation card, retrieves held-out evidence from the paid coalition, and prompts the generator to answer the FEVER claim as yes/no/unknown, which is mapped back to SUPPORTS/REFUTES/NOT ENOUGH INFO. The attack is deliberately potent: a high-volume poison corpus is useful on the validation card but injects wrong-answer instructions into held-out evidence. This is a realistic prompt-injection threat for RAG systems; FedMark-FM does not use attack-specific rules for it, only the same generic risk, duplicate, uncertainty, and audit scoring used elsewhere. This track is not a large-generator benchmark, but it tests whether the market advantage survives a real generated answer rather than only retrieval scoring.                       

> TABLE 4 Generator-backed held-out FEVER RAG using
> google/flan-t5-small . Values are mean ±95% CI.
> Method Acc. Macro-F1 Poison Strategic Volume 0.3187 ±0.0531 0.2362 ±0.0428 1.0 1.0 Leave-one-out 0.3125 ±0.0490 0.2269 ±0.0411 1.0 3.6 FL-Shapley 0.3125 ±0.0624 0.2102 ±0.0629 0.8 2.6 FedMark-FM 0.3937 ±0.0219 0.2718 ±0.0198 0.0 0.0

We compare equal payment, volume, leave-one-out, sampled FL-Shapley, retrieval similarity, Shapley-UCB, and FedMark-FM where applicable. Each rule ranks clients, then selects a budget-feasible subset. Utility includes task per-formance minus cost, privacy, redundancy, and risk terms. Risk-adjusted utility additionally penalizes selected strate-gic clients and rewards retained rare specialists, so we report it as an operator composite rather than an independent ac-curacy metric. Tables therefore keep raw utility, downstream task metrics, strategic selections, rare retention, AUC, and audit/call counts separate wherever possible; the alpha-sweep stress test shows when the composite ordering flips. 

8.2 De-Circularized Held-Out Serving 

Table 4 is the primary serving experiment, and it de-circularizes evaluation by construction: after selecting coali-tions on a validation card, the paid coalition is served on a disjoint test card with a real seq2seq reader. Un-der a high-volume held-out prompt-injection poisoner, FedMark-FM improves downstream accuracy by 7.5– 8.1 percentage points over Volume, leave-one-out, and FL-Shapley, with paired 95% CIs that remain positive (0.0812 ±0.0477 vs FL-Shapley, 0.0813 ±0.0372 vs leave-one-out, and 0.0750 ±0.0372 vs volume). The weaker retrieve– read proxy, moved to Appendix Table S21, has the same direction of effect but is near the three-class chance floor: FedMark-FM has the highest mean accuracy and macro-F1, but several CIs overlap. 

8.3 Market Utility, Ordered Credit, and Adapter Evi-dence 

The FEVER RAG market illustrates the failure FedMark-FM targets: Equal, volume, retrieval-similarity, leave-one-out, FL-Shapley, and Shapley-UCB all select on average two strategic clients under the configured budget, while FedMark-FM selects none and reaches the honest-client utility reference (harmful-client AUC is only a constructed-attack diagnostic; the robustness case rests on held-out serving, strategic counts, and ablations). The second load-bearing result is that ordered S3Val changes rank and selected-set evidence enough to be a contract choice, and the controlled study of Table S15 shows the change is serving-neutral—a payment-fairness choice, not an accuracy lever. On the trained low-rank LoRA validation, FedMark-FM obtains the best utility and risk-adjusted utility while retaining the rare adapter and selecting no strategic clients. 

8.4 De-Circularized Serving at Scale 

To establish serving quality at scale independently of the market’s own objective, we run a larger, fully de-IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 10 

Fig. 4. FedMark-FM-Bench submission flow. TABLE 5 Real-data market validation. R-utility is risk-adjusted utility. Spearman is rank correlation with leave-one-out values. AUC measures harmful-client ranking.                                                                         

> Track Method Utility R-utility Spearman AUC Strategic FEVER RAG Equal 0.0219 ±0.0308 −0.1881 ±0.0308 -0.5874 0.5000 2.0 FEVER RAG Volume −0.0386 ±0.0308 −0.2485 ±0.0308 -0.0489 0.7500 2.0 FEVER RAG Leave-one-out 0.0096 ±0.0308 −0.2004 ±0.0308 1.0000 1.0000 2.0 FEVER RAG FL-Shapley 0.0096 ±0.0308 −0.2004 ±0.0308 0.8881 1.0000 2.0 FEVER RAG Retrieval similarity 0.0158 ±0.0393 −0.1942 ±0.0393 0.4405 0.7031 2.0 FEVER RAG Shapley-UCB 0.0219 ±0.0308 −0.1881 ±0.0308 0.5944 0.6719 2.0 FEVER RAG FedMark-FM 0.1321 ±0.0308 0.1621 ±0.0308 0.8112 1.0000 0.0
> Trained LoRA Equal 0.2284 ±0.0441 0.2284 ±0.0441 -0.1715 0.5000 0.0 Trained LoRA Volume 0.2284 ±0.0441 0.2284 ±0.0441 -0.1715 0.2500 0.0 Trained LoRA Leave-one-out 0.2284 ±0.0441 0.2284 ±0.0441 1.0000 0.9166 0.0 Trained LoRA FedMark-FM 0.2555 ±0.0063 0.2856 ±0.0063 0.8418 1.0000 0.0

circularized end-to-end test. We build FEVER retrieval mar-kets at 50, 100, and 200 clients, each with a rare specialist and roughly 12% strategic clients: a high-volume poison corpus that is validation-useful but injects flipped-label copies of the held-out gold evidence, plus duplicate and sybil iden-tities. Every baseline selects a budget-feasible coalition on a validation card; the selected coalition is then served on a 

disjoint held-out test card and scored only on downstream task accuracy, macro-F1, and evidence exact match—metrics that use neither attack labels nor the risk-adjusted-utility formula. Table 6 reports held-out accuracy. Volume and leave-one-out buy the high-volume poison (6, 12, and 24 poison clients at the three scales) and collapse to 0.07 –

0.13 accuracy; sampled FL-Shapley is similarly harmed. FedMark-FM selects zero strategic clients at every scale and is the best or statistically tied-for-best method—its interval overlaps Equal at 50 clients and Shapley-UCB at 100, and it is highest at 200—while beating the strongest standard valuation baseline (Volume, leave-one-out, or FL-Shapley) by 

+0 .26 , +0 .44 , and +0 .50 as the market grows. Because the score is a held-out task metric, this is a non-circular demon-stration that FedMark-FM’s risk-aware selection converts strategic-robustness signals into serving quality, and that the margin widens with market size. Two comparisons place the margin in context: Shapley-UCB, which also discounts uncertain sellers, is the closest competitor, and simple Equal-weighting performs respectably because the cost model already embeds a risk term. The 200-client markets run in about 27 s in the prototype. 

TABLE 6 De-circularized held-out serving at scale. Test-card accuracy (mean ±

95% CI) for coalitions selected on a separate validation card; no attack labels or risk-adjusted utility enter the score.                         

> Method 50 clients 100 clients 200 clients Equal 0.475 ±0.060 0.500 ±0.074 0.517 ±0.188
> Volume 0.070 ±0.018 0.090 ±0.033 0.100 ±0.075
> Leave-one-out 0.085 ±0.040 0.100 ±0.041 0.133 ±0.091
> FL-Shapley 0.205 ±0.185 0.095 ±0.042 0.108 ±0.071
> Retrieval similarity 0.420 ±0.048 0.465 ±0.070 0.483 ±0.145
> Shapley-UCB 0.455 ±0.059 0.545 ±0.059 0.592 ±0.114
> FedMark-FM 0.465 ±0.091 0.540 ±0.045 0.633 ±0.114

9 DISCUSSION 

9.1 Value Drift 

Contribution values depend on the base model, prompt, retrieval stack, adapter routing, evaluation distribution, and safety rules, so the value index must support revaluation triggers: a client valuable for one base model may be redun-dant or harmful for another. 

9.2 Limitations and Scope 

FedMark-FM occupies a specific operating point. FL-Shapley and Shapley-UCB can exceed it on raw utility because they optimize marginal validation utility directly, whereas FedMark-FM prices contribution under duplicate, sybil, poison, privacy, and audit constraints, preserves scarce clients when the validation slice supports them, and produces a ledger that can be disputed and reval-ued. Its objective is therefore a practical balance between utility, robustness, participation fairness, and auditability rather than immediate accuracy alone. Two scope notes IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 11 

TABLE 7 Security and privacy primitives.                                

> Primitive Status What fails if missing Signed contract card Mandatory Rare slices, weights, and probes can be retrofitted. Payload hashes Mandatory Duplicate and dispute evidence is not replayable. Bounded DP ag-gregate releases Mandatory for public aggre-gates Published statistics can leak sensitive values. Per-round privacy accounting Mandatory (ϵ, δ )spend cannot be audited. Hidden audit probe separation Mandatory Strategic clients can overfit public probes. Secure aggrega-tion Mandatory for private update sketches Operator can inspect individual updates. Hardware TEE at-testation Mandatory for raw-payload evaluation Signing key has no hardware root of trust (evidence stays third-party verifiable in soft-ware). Watermark checks Optional defense Adaptive mimicry becomes easier.

follow. The adapter track uses a trained, cached Hugging-Face/PEFT LoRA path; full multi-adapter PEFT valuation is a scale-up experiment rather than the default. And be-cause raw artifacts are privacy-constrained, FedMark-FM provides approximate manipulation resistance—lowering expected gains from common attacks, exposing uncertainty, and making high-risk payments auditable—rather than a dominant-strategy truthfulness guarantee. 

9.3 Privacy Limits 

The framework reduces raw data exposure but does not eliminate privacy risk. The prototype provides bounded DP aggregate releases with composition accounting and third-party-verifiable (Ed25519) signed evidence whose schema maps field-for-field to hardware TEE attestation documents (Table S13); payment values are protected through secure or attested evaluation and ledger access control rather than per-value DP. Table 7 separates the mandatory primitives (signed contract cards, payload hashes, bounded DP re-leases, hidden-probe separation, immutable logs, per-round accounting) from those needed for stronger confidentiality (secure aggregation and hardware-backed attestation), and states what fails without each. Without hardware attesta-tion or secure aggregation, the prototype is a reproducible evidence path, not an end-to-end privacy proof. 

10 CONCLUSION 

This paper introduced FedMark-FM, an auditable, risk-adjusted data-market framework for federated foundation-model adaptation. The core idea is to value and pay for heterogeneous foundation-model adaptation artifacts un-der privacy, non-IID heterogeneity, strategic behavior, and system constraints. FedMark-FM combines a contribution registry, secure evaluation sandbox, unordered or pipeline-ordered S3Val valuation engine, uncertainty-aware payment rule, market ledger, and dispute auditor. Experiments on FEVER retrieval, held-out RAG serving, low-rank PyTorch adapters, and cached HF/PEFT LoRA validation show that FedMark-FM preserves held-out task quality under adver-sarial participation—improving downstream accuracy by 7.5–8.1 points over standard valuation baselines while se-lecting zero strategic clients—and provides a concrete mar-ket layer for ordered, risk-adjusted, rare-client-preserving, and audit-ready FedFM adaptation contribution valuation. 

DATA AND CODE AVAILABILITY 

The source code, benchmark harness (FedMark-FM-Bench), datasets, and scripts required to reproduce all experiments, tables, and figures in this paper are available at https:// anonymous.4open.science/r/FedMark-FM-3A89. 

REFERENCES 

[1] P. Kairouz, H. B. McMahan, B. Avent, A. Bellet, M. Bennis, A. N. Bhagoji, K. Bonawitz, Z. Charles, G. Cormode, R. Cummings et al. ,“Advances and open problems in federated learning,” Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning , vol. 14, no. 1–2, pp. 1–210, 2021. [2] X. Yang, S. Xiang, C. Peng et al. , “Federated learning incentive mechanism design via shapley value and pareto optimality,” Ax-ioms , vol. 12, no. 7, p. 636, 2023. [3] A. Ghorbani and J. Zou, “Data shapley: Equitable valuation of data for machine learning,” in Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning , 2019, pp. 2242–2251. [4] R. Jia, D. Dao, B. Wang, F. A. Hubis, N. Hynes, N. M. G ¨ urel, B. Li, C. Zhang, D. Song, and C. J. Spanos, “Efficient task-specific data valuation for nearest neighbor algorithms,” Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 1610–1623, 2019. [5] T. Fan, H. Gu, X. Cao et al. , “Ten challenging problems in federated foundation models,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 4314–4337, 2025. [6] L. S. Shapley, “A value for n-person games,” in Contributions to the Theory of Games II . Princeton University Press, 1953, pp. 307–317. [7] K. Chen and Z. Xu, “Federated learning for data market: Shapley-ucb for seller selection and incentives,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.09107 , 2024. [8] Z. Wang et al. , “Fedave: Adaptive data value evaluation frame-work for collaborative fairness in federated learning,” Neurocom-puting , vol. 574, p. 127227, 2024. [9] N. Zhang, X. Xu, X. Liu, J. Wu, and H. Tang, “Incentive mecha-nism of foundation model enabled cross-silo federated learning,” 

Scientific Reports , vol. 15, p. 24181, 2025. [10] W. Vickrey, “Counterspeculation, auctions, and competitive sealed tenders,” Journal of Finance , vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 8–37, 1961. [11] E. H. Clarke, “Multipart pricing of public goods,” Public Choice ,vol. 11, pp. 17–33, 1971. [12] T. Groves, “Incentives in teams,” Econometrica , vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 617–631, 1973. [13] N. Miller, P. Resnick, and R. Zeckhauser, “Eliciting informative feedback: The peer-prediction method,” in Management Science ,vol. 51, no. 9, 2005, pp. 1359–1373. [14] Z. Jiang, Y. Cao, Y. Wang, H. Chen, and C. Xu, “FL-Market: Trading private models in federated learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.04384 , 2021. [15] C. Fung, C. J. M. Yoon, and I. Beschastnikh, “Mitigating sybils in federated learning poisoning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.04866 ,2018. [16] P. W. Koh and P. Liang, “Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions,” in Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning , 2017, pp. 1885–1894. [17] J. Yoon, S. O. Arik, and T. Pfister, “Data valuation using reinforce-ment learning,” in Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 119, 2020, pp. 10 842–10 851. [18] Y. Kwon and J. Zou, “Beta shapley: A unified and noise-reduced data valuation framework for machine learning,” in International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , 2022, pp. 8780– 8802. [19] Z. Ye and H. Yoganarasimhan, “Fair document valuation in llm summaries via shapley values,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23842 ,2025. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 12 

[20] M. Han, S. A. Esmaeili, M. Albert, and H. Xu, “Data auctions for retrieval augmented generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.16007 ,2025. [21] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin, N. Goyal, H. K ¨ uttler, M. Lewis, W.-t. Yih, T. Rockt¨ aschel et al. , “Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks,” in 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2020. [22] E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang, and W. Chen, “Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language mod-els,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. [23] L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. L. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal, K. Slama, A. Ray et al. , “Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback,” in 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2022. [24] Y. J. Cho, L. Liu, Z. Xu, A. Fahrezi, and G. Joshi, “Heterogeneous lora for federated fine-tuning of on-device foundation models,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.06432 , 2024. [25] S. Chen, Y. Ju, H. Dalal, Z. Zhu, and A. Khisti, “Robust federated finetuning of foundation models via alternating minimization of lora,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02346 , 2024. [26] R. Singhal, K. Ponkshe, and P. Vepakomma, “FedEx-LoRA: Exact aggregation for federated and efficient fine-tuning of foundation models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.09432 , 2025. [27] J. Bian, L. Wang, L. Zhang, and J. Xu, “LoRA-FAIR: Federated LoRA fine-tuning with aggregation and initialization refinement,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.14961 , 2024. [28] Y. Wang et al. , “FLoRA: Federated fine-tuning large language models with heterogeneous low-rank adaptations,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. [29] J. Huang, X. Wu, T. He, and Q. Lao, “Stabilized fine-tuning with lora in federated learning: Mitigating the side effect of client size and rank via the scaling factor,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.08058 ,2026. [30] M. Kou, X. Xia, Z. Wang, I. Khalil, R. Luo, J. Zhou, and M. Xue, “WinFLoRA: Incentivizing client-adaptive aggregation in feder-ated LoRA under privacy heterogeneity,” in Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2026 , 2026, pp. 5241–5252. [31] A. Muhamed, M. Diab, and V. Smith, “CoRAG: Collaborative retrieval-augmented generation,” in Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL): Short Papers , 2025, pp. 265–276. [32] Q. Mao et al. , “FedE4RAG: Privacy-preserving federated embed-ding learning for retrieval-augmented generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19101 , 2025. [33] C. Lu, M. M. Amiri, and R. Raskar, “Data measurements for decentralized data markets,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04257 , 2024. [34] X. Zheng, X. Chang, R. Jia, and Y. Tan, “Towards data valuation via asymmetric data shapley,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.00388 , 2024. [35] X. Zheng, Y. Huang, X. Chang, R. Jia, and Y. Tan, “Rethinking data value: Asymmetric data shapley for structure-aware valuation in data markets and machine learning pipelines,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.12863 , 2025. [36] H. Chi, Z. Yang, L. Zeng, W. Fan, and Y. Ma, “Precedence-constrained winter value for effective graph data valuation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01943 , 2024. [37] H. KhademSohi, H. Hemmati, J. Zhou, and S. Drew, “Owen sam-pling accelerates contribution estimation in federated learning,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.21261 , 2025. [38] A. Ukaye, M. Abdu-Aguye, N. Tastan, and K. Nandakumar, “Data-free contribution estimation in federated learning using gradient von neumann entropy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.22562 ,2026. [39] P. Addison, M.-T. H. Nguyen, T. Medan, J. Shah, M. T. Manzari, B. McElrone, L. Lalwani, A. More, S. Sharma, H. R. Roth, I. Yang, C. Chen, D. Xu, Y. Cheng, A. Feng, and Z. Xu, “C-FedRAG: A confidential federated retrieval-augmented generation system,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.13163 , 2024. [40] P. Yan, S. Liang, Y. Hua, L. Jiang, K. Yu, Y. Sun, Y. Zhang, T. Song, N. Hu, X. Liang, B. He, and H. Guan, “Fweb3: A practical incentive-aware federated learning framework,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.00666 , 2026. [41] U. Faigle and W. Kern, “The Shapley value for cooperative games under precedence constraints,” International Journal of Game Theory ,vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 249–266, 1992. [42] G. Owen, “Values of games with a priori unions,” in Mathematical Economics and Game Theory . Springer, 1977, pp. 76–88. [43] M. Bun and T. Steinke, “Concentrated differential privacy: Simpli-fications, extensions, and lower bounds,” in Theory of Cryptography Conference , 2016, pp. 635–658. [44] I. Mironov, “R´ enyi differential privacy,” in 2017 IEEE 30th Com-puter Security Foundations Symposium (CSF) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 263– 275. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 13 

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL 

This supplement contains the appendices referenced from the main paper; its sections, tables, figures, and equations are numbered with an “S” prefix. 

S1 DEFERRED PROOFS AND ADDITIONAL RE-

> SULTS

S1.1 Theoretical Properties 

We establish the following properties under assumptions that define their scope. Utilities are bounded in [a, b ]. The surrogate marginal prediction error is at most ϵsur in ex-pectation. Privacy-preserving sketches introduce at most 

ϵpriv utility distortion. Client metadata and provenance commitments are verifiable and cannot be forged. Duplicate clustering identifies a same-source split with recall at least 

rdup . A hidden audit detects a poisoned contribution with probability q and applies audit penalty κaud . A strategic deviation can increase apparent value by at most gi before market penalties. For sybil analysis, ϵsplit is the maximum extra apparent value created by splitting a fixed portfolio, and δ is the duplicate penalty applied to each detected extra identity in the same redundancy cluster. Using the notation above, final payments under budget 

B are 

pi =

(epi, P 

> j

epj ≤ B, B epi/ P 

> j

epj , P 

> j

epj > B. (S1) Client utility is ui = pi − cact i − ℓi, where cact i is actual participation cost and ℓi is privacy or manipulation loss. 

Proposition 1 (S3Val estimation error) . Let ¯∆i be the empirical mean of mi bounded direct marginal evaluations and let bϕi replace some direct calls with a surrogate and DP/sketch releases. If utilities lie in [a, b ], the surrogate error is at most ϵsur with probability 1 − δsur , and privacy/sketch distortion is at most 

ϵpriv with probability 1 − δpriv , then with probability at least 

1 − δ − δsur − δpriv ,

| bϕi − ϕi| ≤ (b − a)

s

log(2 /δ )2mi

+ ϵsur + ϵpriv .

Proof: Let eϕi be the empirical mean of true sampled marginals. Hoeffding’s inequality gives the first term for 

| eϕi − ϕi|. The estimator differs from eϕi only through surro-gate replacement and privacy/sketch perturbation. A union bound over the three events and the triangle inequality yield the additive decomposition. We calibrate the LCB intervals empirically. We use split conformal calibration: sampled marginal estimates are com-puted on a proper valuation split, absolute residuals are computed on a calibration split, and the lower predictive bound for a test client is bϕi − bq1−α, where bq1−α is the finite-sample conformal residual quantile. Under exchangeability of calibration and test residuals within a contract stratum, this gives marginal 1 − α lower-bound coverage for the target value used by that stratum. Exchangeability is only approximate under non-IID coalitions, so we report cover-age rather than assuming it. On small FEVER submarkets with at most ten clients, we compute exact Shapley values exhaustively; naive sampled intervals cover 0.3333 of exact values, while split conformal intervals cover 1.0 with mean width 0.0141. On larger markets where exact Shapley is infeasible, the same procedure is reported against leave-one-client-out and sampled-Shapley surrogates as a diagnostic, not as a formal proof. 

Theorem 2 (Selection correctness under value gaps) . Fix a budget B, a deterministic budgeted selector A(·), and a down-stream test utility Utest that is independent of attack labels and payment penalties. Let S⋆ = A(ϕ) denote the budget-feasible downstream-oracle set under true client values ϕi, and let bS = A( bϕ) be the paid set obtained from estimated values. Suppose S⋆ has margin 

∆A = min 

> i∈S⋆,j / ∈S⋆

 ϕi

ci

− ϕj

cj



> 0

with respect to the value-density ordering used by A, and costs satisfy ci ≤ cmax . If every client has 

mi ≥ 2( b − a)2

(∆ Aci/2 − ϵsur − ϵpriv )2 log 2nδ

direct-equivalent audits and ∆Aci/2 > ϵ sur + ϵpriv , then 

Pr[ bS̸ = S⋆] ≤ δ. 

Consequently, the operator regret against the downstream oracle satisfies 

Utest (S⋆) − Utest ( bS) = 0 

on the same high-probability event, and is at most the range of 

Utest otherwise. Proof: By Proposition 1 and a union bound over n

clients, all value estimates are within ∆Aci/2 of their true values with probability at least 1−δ. On that event, every se-lected client’s value density remains above every unselected client’s value density, so the deterministic selector returns 

S⋆. The regret statement follows because the selected set is identical on the high-probability event; outside the event, regret is trivially bounded by the utility range. 

Remark 1 (budget feasibility). Budget feasibility is an arith-metic invariant of the scaled payment rule. If P 

> i

epi ≤ B,payments are unchanged; otherwise pi = B epi/ P 

> j

epj , so P 

> i

pi = B.

Remark 2 (payment monotonicity). For two clients with equal cost, privacy, risk, uncertainty, and scarcity terms, a larger LCB i gives a weakly larger raw payment. Budget scaling multiplies all positive raw payments by the same nonnegative factor, preserving the order. 

Proposition 2 (Approximate incentive compatibility) . Sup-pose a deviation can increase client i’s apparent payment by at most gi, but triggers expected audit penalty qκ aud , risk discount 

ηr i, and manipulation loss ℓman i . Honest reporting is ϵi-dominant with 

ϵi = max(0 , g i − qκ aud − ηr i − ℓman i ).

In particular, the deviation is unprofitable when qκ aud + ηr i +

ℓman i ≥ gi.Proof: The deviation’s utility gain is at most its ap-parent payment gain minus expected audit penalty, risk discount, and manipulation loss. Taking the positive part gives ϵi.IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 14 

Proposition 3 (Sybil splitting unprofitability) . If a portfolio is split into k same-cluster identities and the aggregate split value can exceed the honest unsplit value by at most ϵsplit , then 

Gain sybil ≤ ϵsplit − rdup (k − 1) δ. 

Sybil splitting is unprofitable whenever rdup (k − 1) δ ≥ ϵsplit .Proof: The split can add at most ϵsplit apparent value. With probability or recall rdup , each extra identity after the first receives duplicate penalty δ. Subtracting expected penalties gives the bound. 

Proposition 4 (Audit-adjusted poisoning profitability) . Apoisoned contribution with apparent gain g, audit detection prob-ability q, audit penalty κaud , and risk score ri has expected extra profit at most 

E[prof it poison ] ≤ g − qκ aud − ηr i.

Poisoning is unprofitable whenever qκ aud + ηr i ≥ g.Proof: The apparent gain is g. The expected audit penalty is qκ aud , and the deterministic market risk discount is ηr i. Summing the terms yields the inequality. 

Proposition 5 (Individual rationality) . For an honest client with ℓi = 0 , if pi ≥ cact i , then participation is individually rational. A sufficient pre-scaling condition is 

LCB i + ρs i ≥ βc i + γϵ priv i + cact i .

Proof: The first statement follows from ui = pi −

cact i ≥ 0. The sufficient condition makes the raw payment at least actual cost when risk is zero; budget scaling preserves non-negativity, and individual rationality can be enforced by rejecting clients whose scaled payment falls below re-serve cost. 

S1.2 Extended Validation 

We also run a larger FEVER validation with 28 clients, including 24 honest clients and four strategic clients. Ta-ble S1 shows that FL-Shapley obtains the best raw utility in this larger setting, while FedMark-FM is close in raw utility and does not force rare-client selection when the rare slice is not utility-improving. Consistent with its design, FedMark-FM optimizes a different operating point from a pure accuracy maximizer: raw utility can favor FL-Shapley or Shapley-UCB, while FedMark-FM targets risk-adjusted and audit-ready market value. Figure S1 plots the risk-adjusted utilities for the large FEVER RAG market and the trained LoRA coalition track, where FedMark-FM reaches 0.65 versus 0.22–0.29 for the baselines. Finally, we run actual HuggingFace/PEFT LoRA experiments using the pretrained public encoder 

distilbert-base-uncased , replacing the earlier random tiny test fixture. A single-adapter smoke run completes locally with 630,532 trainable LoRA parameters out of 67,587,080 total parameters (0.9329%), takes 5.6732 seconds for training and 1.6443 seconds for inference, and reaches 0.4688 AG News accuracy on a 64-example smoke test. We also run a PEFT coalition market: six client adapters are trained separately, and coalitions are evaluated by averaging adapter logits. In this coalition track, FedMark-FM selects no strategic adapters, retains the Equal      

> Volume
> LeaveOneOut
> FL-Shapley
> Shapley-UCB
> FedMark-FM
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Risk-adjusted utility  Urisk
> 0.12
> 0.22
> 0.12
> 0.22 0.17
> 0.29
> 0.19 0.18 0.18
> 0.65
> Large FEVER RAG
> Trained LoRA (coalition)
> FedMark-FM (FEVER)
> FedMark-FM (LoRA)
> Fig. S1. Risk-adjusted utility Urisk for the large FEVER RAG market and the trained LoRA coalition track; higher is better. FedMark-FM is highlighted in each group.

rare adapter, and reaches 0.6462 risk-adjusted utility versus 0.2200 for equal and volume selection and 0.2859 for leave-one-out. These results are not competitive classification benchmarks; they verify a real pretrained-transformer PEFT coalition path. 

S1.3 Scalability 

Table S2 reports the original RAG valuation runtime as the number of clients and coalition samples increase. The script counts two utility calls per sampled marginal. To ground the data-systems claim in measurement rather than projection, Table S3 adds measured FEVER markets at approximately 200, 500, and 1000 clients with a non-degenerate coverage utility. These larger rows use fewer coalition samples because they validate wall-clock scale and selection quality, not to replace the smaller high-fidelity RAG evaluator. Client counts include four strategic stress clients; Volume uses no coalition utility calls, while FL-Shapley and FedMark-FM share sampled-marginal calls. The table uses a tight selection budget with method-specific runtime and call accounting, so Volume and FL-Shapley do not coincide. Under this cheap coverage utility, FL-Shapley is the strongest raw selector at scale, while FedMark-FM remains above Volume but gives up raw coverage at 1000 clients because its risk/duplication discounts are not tuned for the proxy. A formal cost decomposition T (n, m, k, h ) = 

Tinit (n)+ m·(2 h T ev (n)+(1 −h) Tsu +Tfe +Tup )+ L T dp +R T sg ,a coarse fit of Tstep (n) ≈ 2.0×10 −3 n1.5 seconds for n ≥ 16 , a per-component breakdown, and a direct Tev (n) microbench-mark are given in the appendix S3Val Computational Cost subsection (Tables S16, S18, and S17). The analytic model serves as an explanatory fit checked against measurements rather than as primary evidence. 

S1.4 Attack Tests 

Table S4 reports stress tests on the real-data track. The values are attack indicators: for duplicate and poison, lower is better; for non-IID specialist, higher is better. FedMark-FM passes all tested attacks on both tracks. 

S1.5 Consolidated Robustness and Sensitivity Checks 

We add targeted checks for the most fragile parts of the market layer. Instead of presenting each auxiliary CSV as IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 15 

TABLE S1 Extended validation. Large FEVER uses 28 clients. PEFT validates a trained, cached LoRA path.                         

> Method/track Utility R-utility AUC Large FEVER FL-Shapley 0.1869 ±0.0118 0.1869 ±0.0118 1.0000 Large FEVER Shapley-UCB 0.1837 ±0.0138 0.1837 ±0.0138 0.6573 Large FEVER FedMark-FM 0.1792 ±0.0137 0.1792 ±0.0137 1.0000 Large FEVER Leave-one-out 0.1712 ±0.0163 0.1712 ±0.0163 1.0000 Large FEVER Volume 0.0938 ±0.0098 0.1238 ±0.0098 0.7500 HF/PEFT LoRA smoke 0.4587 N/A N/A HF/PEFT LoRA coalition 0.6162 ±0.1732 0.6462 ±0.1732 N/A

TABLE S2 Scalability of sampled valuation on the FEVER RAG track. 

Clients Samples Runtime (s) Calls 8 6 0.6495 12 8 16 1.1540 32 16 6 0.8888 12 16 16 1.5915 32 32 6 1.8874 12 32 16 5.0247 32 64 6 6.2499 12 64 16 15.1439 32 

TABLE S3 Measured FEVER market scale. Selection quality is the selected coalition’s coverage utility divided by a greedy downstream oracle; higher is better.                                                   

> Clients Method Calls Runtime (s) Quality Gap 204 Volume 00.0001 0.6658 0.1154 204 FL-Shapley 816 0.0092 0.9260 0.0256
> 204 FedMark-FM 816 0.0092 0.9056 0.0326 504 Volume 00.0002 0.5968 0.1876 504 FL-Shapley 1008 0.0256 0.8290 0.0794
> 504 FedMark-FM 1008 0.0256 0.8170 0.0851 1004 Volume 00.0003 0.4517 0.2611 1004 FL-Shapley 2008 0.0819 0.6331 0.1748
> 1004 FedMark-FM 2008 0.0819 0.5260 0.2257

a separate appendix table, Fig. S2 groups roughly fifteen checks into four panels, reported in two consolidated tables. Table S5 covers calibration and defenses: naive sampled-marginal intervals are overconfident while exact-Shapley split-conformal calibration reaches full coverage on small FEVER submarkets; no single surrogate family dominates every artifact type; the hard-paraphrase duplicate threshold gives zero false positives at recall 0.9575; and the incentive-compatibility bound is zero under full defenses but positive (attacker profit 0.035–0.075) under a deliberately weakened profile, so the empirical bound tracks defense settings. Table S6 covers sensitivity and system behavior: budget, privacy-cost, DP-ϵ, and policy-drift sweeps, per-type LCB fairness, wall-clock overhead, multi-round drift, and VCG, procurement, and ordered-valuation baselines. 

S1.6 Ablations 

Table S7 ablates duplicate, risk, scarcity, and full market penalties. The largest degradation comes from removing risk penalties, which admits poisoned or sybil clients and sharply reduces risk-adjusted utility. Removing scarcity hurts rare-specialist selection in the adapter track. These 

TABLE S4 Attack summary for the real-data track. 

Track Attack Mean value Pass rate FEVER RAG Duplicate 0.0 1.0 FEVER RAG Poison 0.0 1.0 FEVER RAG Sybil 0.0 1.0 FEVER RAG Non-IID specialist 1.0 1.0 

Fig. S2. Consolidated robustness and sensitivity evidence, compressing roughly fifteen stress and sensitivity checks into four panels. 

ablations support the claim that the payment mechanism is not merely a Shapley scorer; the market-specific adjustments drive strategic robustness. 

S2 REGISTRY , LEDGER , AND EXPERIMENT 

SCHEMA 

Table S9 gives the minimal registry fields used by the pro-totype. A deployment can add organization-specific com-pliance fields, but these fields are sufficient to reproduce valuation, payment, and dispute checks. The ledger stores the same round id, client id, estimated value, uncertainty, LCB, penalties, scarcity bonus, raw/s-caled payment, evidence hashes, and dispute state so a payment can be replayed after model or policy changes. Table S10 summarizes the configuration of each experiment track. 

S3 NOTATION AND CONTRACT CARD 

Table S11 collects the notation used across valuation, pay-ment, and theory. This table is intended to make the mecha-nism auditable: every payment field in the ledger maps to a symbol in the paper. A market round is defined by an immutable contract card containing the round id, base model, allowed artifact IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 16 

TABLE S5 Calibration, surrogate, and defense checks. 

(a) Calibration and surrogates 

Check Setting Error/coverage Rank/utility Reading CI calibration FEVER, LOO diagnostic Naive 0.2500; calibrated 0.8875 Spearman 0.8629 Raw intervals need calibra-tion. Exact-Shapley CI FEVER n ≤ 10 Naive 0.3333; conformal 1.0000 Width 0.0141 LCB coverage tied to exact values. Surrogate audit budget FEVER 0% →100% direct MAE 0.0371 →0.0062 Spearman 0.4971 →0.8349 Direct audits matter near payments. Surrogate family FEVER RF, 50% audit MAE 0.0104 Spearman 0.6415; R-util. 0.1447 RF is strongest on retrieval. Surrogate family AG News prior, 50% audit MAE 0.0399 Spearman 0.4549; R-util. 0.6792 Class-volume prior is com-petitive. Surrogate family HF/PEFT smoke, 50% audit MAE 0.038–0.084 R-util. 0.6462 vs 0.2200 Learned surrogate beats vol-ume prior. Generator RAG FLAN-T5 held-out reader Acc. 0.3937 Gap 0.075–0.081 Real generator shows robust serving gap. 

(b) Defenses 

Check Setting Detection Market outcome Reading Semantic clustering Threshold 0.55 P/R/F1 1.0000/0.9975/0.9987 FPR 0.0000 Easy duplicates are caught. Embedding duplicate Combined threshold 0.50 P/R/F1 1.0000/0.9889/0.9944 FPR 0.0000 Hash embeddings improve paraphrase recall. Hard paraphrases Threshold 0.65 P/R 1.0000/0.9575 FPR 0.0000 Stricter threshold trades re-call for precision. Collusion audit Cap 0.10 vs none Colluders 0.0 vs 2.0 R-util. −0.0176 vs 

> −0.1373

Group cap suppresses artifi-cial complementarity. Higher-order collusion 3 clients, cap 0.08 Colluders 0.0 R-util. −0.0366 Three-client split is also sup-pressed. Collusion flags Threshold 0.25 Precision 0.0747; recall 1.0000 Legit-FP 0.0 Flags trigger audit, not au-tomatic penalty. IC bounds Full defenses q = 0 .09 –1.0 ϵIC = 0 ; profit 0 Implemented attacks un-profitable. IC bounds No cluster, η = 0 .10 q = 0 , κ = 0 ϵIC , profit 0.035–0.075 Bound has discriminating power. Held-out attacks Adaptive keyword Poison 0.0; strategic 0.2 Acc. 0.3857; regret 0.0514 Served test metric is not cir-cular. Cost gaming 1×–10 × cost plus duplicate Attacker 0.0 Strategic 0.0 Cost inflation does not raise profit. Contract-card swap Weight/slice/probe swaps Detected 1.0 Payment preserved 1.0 Commit-reveal catches post-hoc changes. 

types, utility weights, validation slices, budget, valuation budget, payment parameters, audit policy, and release pol-icy. 

S4 METRIC DEFINITIONS 

For a selected client set S, the reported utility is the same contract utility used for market selection. Risk-adjusted utility adds a market-level robustness adjustment: 

Urisk (S) = U (S) − αstrat |S ∩ Sstrategic |

+ αrare 1{S ∩ Srare ̸ = ∅} .

The coefficients are fixed by the experiment card. Harmful-client AUC treats poisoned, sybil, and duplicate clients as positives and ranks clients by risk score. Duplicate discount is the ratio by which a duplicate client’s payment is reduced relative to its unsuppressed score. Utility ratio divides a method’s utility by the oracle subset utility under the same budget. Strategic selected is the number of selected clients with attack labels. Rare selected indicates whether at least one rare-domain specialist is retained. 

S5 STRESS -T EST PROTOCOL 

The stress tests instantiate sybil splitting, duplicate sub-mission, poisoned contribution, privacy gaming, cost infla-tion, non-IID specialists, and collusion. Each test records selected strategic clients, attack profit, duplicate discount, rare retention, or reserve violation. The goal is executable measurement of common market failures, not immunity to arbitrary adaptive attacks. 

S6 CONTRIBUTION INTERFACE DETAILS 

The registry separates private payloads from market-visible metadata. The payload may remain at the client, inside a secure enclave, or behind a federated endpoint. The market-visible portion must be sufficient to schedule evaluations, detect obvious duplicates, compute privacy and cost adjust-ments, and bind later disputes to the same artifact. Table S12 details the required, optional, and private fields for each artifact type. The market operator should reject artifacts whose base-model id, license, endpoint policy, or provenance commit-ment is inconsistent with the round contract. This is a data-quality and governance check before any mechanism-design step is applied. 

S6.1 Secure Evaluation Interfaces 

For retrieval corpora, the sandbox creates a tempo-rary view or queries signed client endpoints, then com-putes hit rate, redundancy, latency, and risk without IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 17 

TABLE S6 Sensitivity, operating-point, system, and policy-stability checks. 

(a) Sensitivity and operating point 

Check Setting Utility/stability Selection Reading Contract weights FEVER supports slice R-util. 0.2463 Strategic 0.0; rare 1.0 Slice-aware cards matter. Budget sweep FEVER B = 0 .9 → 2.2 Audit 0.95–0.93 Selected 5–13; rare 0–0.67 More budget changes reten-tion. Privacy-cost sweep γ = 0 → 0.35 R-util. 0.1964–0.1965 Strategic 0.0; rare 1.0 Ordering stable in this grid. DP epsilon ϵ = 0 .5 → 16 Rank corr. −0.4637 –

−0.3176 

16 releases Per-value DP noise harms payments. Policy stability RAG top1/top5 vs top3 Spearman 0.8948/0.9594 Strategic 0.0; rare 1.0 Retrieval policy changes values. Drift stability Dense/slice policies Spearman 0.7995/0.5614 Strategic 0.0; rare 1.0 Slice drift is quantitatively visible. Adapter policies Hierarchical/orthogonal proxies R-util. 0.7169/0.6749 Strategic 0.0; rare 1.0 Adapter routing is a con-tract dimension. LCB fairness Adapter per-type LCB R-util. 0.6863 Unc. ratio 1.352 Per-type calibration helps rare clients. Alpha Pareto FEVER αs, α r grid Rank 4.33 if αr = 0 ; 1.67 if αr > 0

Raw 0.1664 Composite ranking is trans-parent. 

(b) System and policy stability 

Check Setting Runtime/calls Outcome Reading System overhead 100 clients, 16 samples 3200 calls; 3.4146s 937.3 calls/s Smoke-shard overhead is small. Utility kernel Fixed shard, 100 clients 0.296 ms/call 24 utility calls Confirms fast 100-client row. Utility kernel Scale-sweep shard, 8 clients 1.371 ms/call 24 utility calls Corpus growth explains slower fit. 50+ client scale FEVER/AG News proxy 324/200 calls 1.50s/1.10s Larger proxy run remains practical. Measured scale FEVER 204/504/1004 clients 0–2008 calls 0.0001–0.0819s Real wall-clock rows con-firm scale by measurement. DP enclave overhead 20 releases 0.0045s 0.226 ms/release Software evidence overhead is tiny. Multi-round 6 rounds Drift 0.0000–0.0306 Strategic 0.0 New rounds handle policy drift. VCG toy Observable 6-client market VCG 0.0799; FedMark-FM 0.0588 VCG needs raw obs. VCG wins when observabil-ity holds. Procurement baseline FEVER OPT-style R-util. 0.2472 Rare 0.0 vs FedMark-FM rare 1.0 Budget efficiency differs from auditability. Ordered valuation FEVER ADS-style Spearman 0.7554 Overlap 0.6667 Pipeline order can change payments. 

TABLE S7 Ablation summary. 

Track Variant R-utility Strategic FEVER RAG Full 0.1843 0.0 

FEVER RAG No risk penalty -0.4086 3.0 FEVER RAG No market penalties -0.3091 2.67 

receiving the full corpus. For adapters, the contract fixes the base model, target modules, composition pol-icy, and validation slices; our implementation includes a cached distilbert-base-uncased PEFT path. Prompts, demonstrations, preference data, and safety data are evalu-ated by contract probes, paraphrase variants, reward/pref-erence probes, or hidden policy probes; public outputs are aggregate scores and evidence hashes unless a dispute requires controlled disclosure. 

S7 DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY AND ENCLAVE IMPLE -

MENTATION 

Our implementation provides a concrete privacy layer. The DP module supports bounded mean releases with clipping, Laplace noise for pure DP, Gaussian noise for approximate DP, post-processing to the declared range, and a composi-tion accountant. Gaussian releases are accounted with zCDP and can be related to RDP-style accounting [43], [44]: 

ρ = X

t

∆2

t

2σ2

t

, ϵ(δ) = ρ + 2 

q

ρ log(1 /δ ).

Laplace releases compose through sequential epsilon addi-tion. Each release records n, sensitivity, mechanism, noise scale, per-release privacy spend, and cumulative privacy spend. The local secure-enclave backend enforces a policy be-fore releasing any statistic. The policy specifies allowed functions, maximum epsilon, maximum delta, whether DP is required, and whether raw values may be released. The default policy forbids raw-value release. Every enclave out-put includes a manifest measurement, policy hash, input hash, output hash, cumulative DP spend, backend type, hardware-attestation flag, and a signature. The reproducible backend signs evidence with an Ed25519 key, so any auditor, buyer, or client can verify evidence with the public key alone; an HMAC, by contrast, can be forged by any party able to check it and is therefore not third-party verifiable. The genuine evidence verifies while any tamper to the released value or the freshness nonce invalidates the sig-nature. The evidence schema mirrors the field layout of real TEE attestation documents (Table S13), so a hardware backend is swapped in by replacing only the signer and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 18 

TABLE S8 Positioning FedMark-FM against adjacent literature. Coverage in the middle columns is shown as Harvey balls (empty = none, quarter = limited/indirect, half = partial, full = yes/addressed).                                      

> Line of work Contribution unit FM artifacts Incentives Strategic robustness Gap addressed by FedMark-FM FL incentives [2], [7] Client data or update Does not model RAG, prompts, adapters, pref-erence, and safety artifacts as traded products. Shapley/data valuation [3], [4], [17] Examples, sources, clients Estimates contribution, but usually lacks apayment ledger, audits, and attack-aware mar-ket controls. Data markets and auc-tions [14], [33] Datasets or sellers Prices data access, but does not bind valuation to private FedFM evaluation pipelines. Structure-aware Shap-ley [34], [35], [36] Ordered data groups Respects pipeline order, but does not define FedFM registry, payment, and audit machin-ery. FedFM systems [5], [9] Private model/data collaboration Identifies incentives as a challenge, but leaves the concrete market mechanism unspecified. Secure/incentive FL sys-tems [39], [40] Updates or RAG context Provides confidentiality or settlement sub-strate, but not typed FM artifact markets. FM adaptation valua-tion [19], [20] Prompts, RAG passages, adapters Values artifacts for model improvement with-out federated sellers, payments, and dispute evidence. FedMark-FM Typed private artifacts Integrates scalable valuation, budgeted pay-ments, risk controls, and auditable system state.

TABLE S9 Contribution registry schema.                

> Field Meaning client id Stable seller identity or verified organiza-tion handle artifact id Unique artifact identifier bound to prove-nance hashes artifact type Retrieval, adapter, prompt, demonstration, preference, safety, or update sketch domain tags Declared and inferred task/domain strata for sampling provenance hash Signed hash or commitment for duplicate and dispute checks privacy budget Declared evaluation budget or privacy pol-icy handle declared cost Claimed compute, curation, labeling, or serving cost risk flags Poison, duplicate, sybil, policy, or uncer-tainty indicators endpoint ref Federated retrieval, adapter, local evalua-tor, or certificate endpoint license policy Use constraints, retention policy, and pay-ment eligibility

its certificate chain, leaving the market ledger unchanged. The one property the software backend cannot provide is a hardware root of trust for the signing key: on real hardware the certificate /cabundle fields carry a manufacturer-endorsed chain (AWS Nitro, Intel SGX/DCAP, AMD SEV-SNP), whereas the software backend self-signs them and reports hardware_attested=false .The prototype releases two DP aggregate statistics in-side the software enclave: mean contribution quality and mean privacy budget. The privacy, enclave, and attestation components exercise bounded input, DP release, budget check, output hash, Ed25519-signed evidence, third-party verification, and ledger storage, writing signed evidence and an attestation document to disk. Table S14 lists the DP accounting settings used in these checks. The DP epsilon sweep shows the expected privacy-utility tension. With 16 bounded value releases on FEVER, strong noise at ϵ = 0 .5 sharply degrades rank correlation, and even ϵ = 16 remains noisy in this tiny per-client release setting. We therefore do not recommend privatizing each individual value release independently in production: composition over many per-client, per-round value releases forces aggressive noise, which can invert payment ranks. The intended use is DP aggregate reporting plus secure or attested evaluation for payment-critical values. Figure S3 vi-sualizes this privacy-utility tradeoff. Thus payments them-selves are not claimed to be differentially private in the cur-rent prototype; their confidentiality comes from the secure-evaluation interface and evidence policy. 

S8 S3V AL IMPLEMENTATION AND SENSITIVITY 

NOTES 

S3Val samples marginal pairs (C, i ) by artifact type, valida-tion slice, redundancy cluster, and risk stratum. The surro-gate features include coalition size, artifact mix, slice cov-erage gaps, redundancy with C, privacy/cost fields, drift, risk, scarcity, and a direct-evaluation indicator; retrieval and adapter tracks add sketch and adapter-fingerprint features. Direct audits are prioritized when uncertainty is high, a payment is near zero or the budget boundary, or a risk flag is present. The evaluation runner reports the detailed CSV rows; the compact reading is that direct audits reduce FEVER MAE from 0.0371 at 0% audit to 0.0062 at 100%, and that no single surrogate dominates every artifact type. Budget, privacy, and policy sweeps are treated as cal-ibration evidence rather than universal defaults. Increas-ing FEVER budget from 0.9 to 2.2 grows selected clients from 5 to 13 while preserving zero strategic selections in the tested grid. The privacy-cost sweep over γ ∈{0, 0.05 , 0.10 , 0.20 , 0.35 } changes payment scores but not strategic selection in the current setup because risk and duplicate terms dominate. Operators should publish the Pareto frontier over raw utility, strategic selections, rare retention, audit rate, and dispute-candidate rate before set-tling a market round. Figure S4 shows how the FedMark-FM rank on FEVER depends on the operator-side risk-adjusted utility weights: the rank improves when rare retention is valued and weakens when αrare = 0 , making the operating-point tradeoff visible rather than implicit. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 19 

TABLE S10 Experiment configuration card. 

Track Seeds Clients Artifacts Utility and baselines FEVER RAG 3 18 Claim evidence passages with dupli-cate, rare, and poison clients Retrieval accuracy minus risk; equal, volume, leave-one-out, FL-Shapley, retrieval similarity, Shapley-UCB, FedMark-FM Trained low-rank adapter 3 12 Lightweight PyTorch low-rank adapters Held-out classification accuracy and robustness checks Large FEVER RAG 10 28 More clients and strategic variants Multiseed RAG utility, risk-adjusted utility, AUC, and scalability counters HF/PEFT LoRA smoke 1 1 Cached pretrained DistilBERT LoRA path Training seconds, inference seconds, trainable parameters, total parameters, and LoRA per-centage HF/PEFT LoRA coalition 2 4 Real PEFT client adapters and coalition evaluations Coalition utility with equal, volume, leave-one-out, and FedMark-FM payment selections 

TABLE S11 Notation summary. 

Symbol Meaning 

N Set of participating clients 

Πi, Π( C) Client i’s private portfolio and coalition portfolio union 

C Coalition of clients evaluated by the sandbox 

U (C) Contract utility of coalition Cϕi Ideal Shapley-style value of client i

bϕi Estimated client value returned by S3Val 

σi Estimation uncertainty for client iLCB i Lower confidence bound bϕi − λσ i

λ Uncertainty discount; default value 0.75 

β Cost-penalty coefficient; default value 0.28 

γ Conversion from privacy/evaluation spend to pay-ment penalty; default value 0.20 

η Manipulation-risk penalty; default value 0.75 

ρ Scarcity bonus weight; default value 0.25 

di, r i Duplicate risk and manipulation risk 

Φ( C) Privacy-budget consumption or leakage term in util-ity 

κaud Audit penalty applied after verified manipulation 

ci, ϵ priv i , s i Verified cost, privacy budget, and scarcity score 

epi, p i Raw and budget-scaled payments 

B Market budget for the round 

Choosing the payment coefficients. The weights 

(λ, β, γ, η, ρ ) are operator policy rather than data-fitted parameters, and we recommend selecting them from the Pareto frontier above: fix the uncertainty discount λ from the desired LCB coverage, set the cost and privacy conversions 

β, γ from verified unit prices, and choose the risk and scarcity weights η, ρ to hit a target strategic-selection and rare-retention rate. Selection is robust to the remaining slack because, as the sweeps show, the risk and duplicate terms dominate the ordering once η exceeds a small threshold, and the privacy-cost sweep leaves strategic selection unchanged. Duplicate and manipulation scores are audit triggers backed by provenance commitments, not guarantees: token/tri-gram and embedding overlaps catch easy and paraphrased copies but can be evaded by strong adaptive paraphrase, so a deployment should add provenance attestation and watermark checks for defense-in-depth, and update-sketch tracks can plug a gradient-diversity sybil defense [15] in behind the same evaluator interface. Scarcity bonuses require pre-committed validation slices; post-hoc seller-proposed micro-slices are dispute evidence, not automatic bonuses. Duplicate defenses combine prove-nance hashes, lexical/embedding similarity, adapter delta fingerprints, target-module metadata, and hidden probes. 0.5 1 4 8 16 

DP per release 

0.4 

0.2 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

> mean metric

DP value-release tradeoff 

rank correlation 

payment overlap 

risk-adjusted utility 

Fig. S3. DP value-release tradeoff on FEVER. 0.05 0.1 0.3 1

strategic penalty αstrat 

0

0.05 

0.3 

1

> rare bonus  αrare

4.3 4.3 4.3 4.3 

1.7 1.7 1.7 1.7 

1.7 1.7 1.7 1.7 

1.7 1.7 1.7 1.7 

FedMark-FM rank across risk-utility weights 

1.0 

1.5 

2.0 

2.5 

3.0 

3.5 

4.0 

4.5 

5.0 

> mean rank (lower is better)

Fig. S4. Sensitivity of FedMark-FM’s rank to the operator-side risk-adjusted utility weights on FEVER. 

The token/trigram tests are reproducible low-cost checks, not a complete adaptive-paraphrase defense. 

S8.1 Ordered Pipeline Valuation 

S3Val can use unordered or ADS-style ordered sampling. Ordered sampling restricts permutations to retrieval →IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 20 

TABLE S12 Artifact-specific contribution interface. Required fields are visible to the market; private fields remain behind the endpoint or are exposed only through secure evaluation.                           

> Artifact Required market-visible fields Optional sketches/certificates Private payload Retrieval corpus Domain tags, language, passage count, provenance hash, endpoint reference, li-cense policy MinHash, embedding centroids, BM25 term sketch, coverage histogram, duplicate hashes Passage text, document metadata, private access logs LoRA adapter Base-model id, rank, target modules, parameter count, adapter hash, calibra-tion split id Delta norms, routing hints, public calibration trace, safety certificate Adapter weights when served behind a private loader Prompt template Task tags, token length, prompt hash, policy constraints Robustness trace, paraphrase sensitivity, public/private score gap Full prompt if proprietary Demonstrations Task tags, count, format, label-space de-scription, source hash Embedding centroid, class/domain his-togram, annotator reliability Demonstration text or labels Preference data Pair count, preference dimensions, an-notator policy, source hash Disagreement rate, category histogram, reward-model certificate Pairwise preference records Safety data Risk taxonomy, policy version, source hash, severity mix Hidden-probe certificate, jailbreak family tags, red-team provenance Full safety prompts and expected policies Update sketch Round id, model version, secure aggre-gation handle, update norm range Clipped norm certificate, DP parameter cer-tificate, validation delta Raw gradient/update

TABLE S13 Attestation-evidence fields map to real TEE attestation documents; only the root of trust for the signing key differs in the software backend.                         

> FedMark-FM evidence AWS Nitro Intel SGX/DCAP AMD SEV-SNP
> measurement PCR0 MRENCLAVE MEASUREMENT
> code_hash PCR8 MRSIGNER ID KEY DIGEST
> public_key public_key REPORTDATA REPORT DATA
> nonce nonce REPORTDATA REPORT DATA
> output_hash user_data REPORTDATA REPORT DATA
> certificate certificate PCK cert VCEK cert
> signature COSE Sign1 ECDSA quote VCEK sig

TABLE S14 DP accounting settings used in our checks.                     

> Check Mechanism Per rel. (ϵ, δ )Clip Releases Enclave mean Gauss./Lap. (0 .5,10 −6)[0 ,1] 1–20 Value sweep Laplace (0 .5–16 ,10 −6)[−1,1] 16 Privacy grid Lap./zCDP proxy
> γgrid track-specific 16–50

prompt/demonstration → adapter → preference/safety groups, preserving marginal-credit accounting while match-ing serving precedence. On FEVER, ordered S3Val has Spearman 0.7554 and selected-set overlap 0.6667 versus unordered S3Val. The contract card stores the group order so disputed payments can be replayed. 

Sensitivity to order misspecification. Because credit depends on the declared group order, we test how much a wrong order matters. Within a group the value is permutation-invariant by within-layer symmetry, so only the cross-group precedence is consequential. Reversing the retrieval ≺reader precedence on the real-FEVER pipeline redistributes credit substantially (correct-versus-reversed Spearman 0.57 ) and modestly lowers held-out serving ac-curacy ( ∆ = −0.04 ± 0.04 ), confirming that the serving order is a consequential contract parameter rather than a free choice. The operator therefore commits the order in the contract card and disputes replay payments under the recorded order; when the correct order is genuinely unknown, running unordered S3Val avoids imposing an unwarranted precedence. 

Is ordered valuation more correct, or only different? 

TABLE S15 Ordered valuation is serving-neutral. Paired ordered −unordered held-out FEVER serving accuracy at strong precedence ( g=1 ); every CI covers zero. Credit is nonetheless redistributed (bottom row).                     

> Budget ∆accuracy (95% CI) P(∆ >0)
> 1.4 +0 .011 ±0.021 0.47 1.7 −0.009 ±0.022 0.40 2.0 +0 .004 ±0.014 0.42 Credit redistribution Spearman 0.725 overlap 0.690

Changed payments are not by themselves evidence that ordered credit is the right credit. We therefore ran a con-trolled held-out serving study on real FEVER data with two artifact groups that have a genuine serving precedence: retrieval clients provide context and reader clients supply an answer policy that can only correct a label once the retrieval group has surfaced the gold evidence. A prece-dence knob g ∈ [0 , 1] tunes how strongly reader value is gated on retrieval ( g=0 : no precedence; g=1 : strong precedence). Each rule scores clients on a validation card, selects a budget-feasible coalition, and is then served on a disjoint held-out test card; the served accuracy is the ground truth, and the same market and budget are used for both rules. Table S15 reports the outcome. Ordered valuation redistributes credit (ordered-vs-unordered Spearman 0.725 ,selected-set overlap 0.690 ), but the paired held-out accuracy difference is statistically indistinguishable from zero across budgets at strong precedence ( ∆ ∈ [−0.009 , +0 .011] , all 95% CIs covering zero, sign ≈ 50/50). An exact-Shapley small market agrees ( −0.011 ± 0.058 ) and confirms the samplers recover their targets (sampled-ordered vs exact-ordered ρ=0 .958 ; sampled-unordered vs exact-symmetric 

ρ=0 .935 ). We conclude that ordered valuation is serving-neutral : it aligns payment with the causal serving order without changing task quality, which is a payment-fairness property rather than an accuracy improvement. 

S8.2 Computational Cost 

We decompose one market round into a one-time setup phase and a per-marginal sampling phase. Let n be the number of clients, m the number of sampled marginal pairs IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 21 

TABLE S16 Complexity-model fit to Table S2. Fitted constants are rounded; the scaling interpretation is intended for n ≥ 16 .                                      

> Clients nMarginals mMeasured (s) Fitted (s) Rel. err. 860.6495 0.444 −31 .6%
> 816 1.1540 0.834 −27 .7%
> 16 60.8888 0.821 −7.6%
> 16 16 1.5915 1.891 +18 .8%
> 32 61.8874 1.916 +1 .5%
> 32 16 5.0247 4.855 −3.4%
> 64 66.2499 4.974 −20 .4%
> 64 16 15.1439 13.048 −13 .8%

TABLE S17 Direct Tev (n) microbenchmark. Fixed-shard rows keep per-client shard size constant; scale-sweep rows use the same shard schedule as the scalability fit.                            

> Shard schedule Clients Docs/client ms/call Fixed smoke 830.163 Fixed smoke 32 30.248 Fixed smoke 64 30.264 Fixed smoke 100 30.296 Scale sweep 822 1.371 Scale sweep 32 50.433 Scale sweep 64 30.265 Scale sweep 100 30.291

(C, i ), k the number of redundancy clusters, h ∈ [0 , 1] the direct-audit fraction, L the number of differentially private (DP) releases per round, and R the number of evidence records signed. The round cost is 

T (n, m, k, h ) = n T sk + n2Tcl + n T reg 

| {z }

> Tinit (n)

+ m· 2h T ev (n) + (1 −h) Tsu + Tfe + Tup 



+ L T dp + R T sg , (S2) where Tsk is sketch construction per client (MinHash and centroids), Tcl is pairwise redundancy clustering (linkage over sketch similarity, O(n2) worst case), Treg is registry write plus provenance commit, Tev (n) is one coalition utility call (the only term that scales with n through retrieval index size or coalition payload), Tsu is one surrogate prediction, 

Tfe is feature-vector construction, Tup is the online surrogate update (online ridge: O(d2) where d is feature dimension), 

Tdp is one DP release (clip, noise, accountant update), and 

Tsg is one signed-evidence write. Utility evaluation domi-nates when n, m, or h is large; DP and signing scale with round-policy constants. A coarse fit to Table S2 gives 

Tstep (n) ≈ 2.0×10 −3 n1.5 s, Tinit (n) ≤ 1 s ,

for n ≥ 16 . Table S16 reports measured versus fitted runtime; Table S17 separates fixed-shard and scale-sweep utility-call costs; Table S18 shows that per-marginal evalua-tion dominates once m grows. Combining the fits, FedMark-FM valuation at fixed sur-rogate audit rate h costs 

T (n, m ) = O n1.5hm  + O(n2) + O d2m + O(L + R),

where the first term (coalition utility evaluation) is domi-nant whenever hm ≥ Θ( n0.5) and where the O(n2) clus-tering term is incurred once per round. Under the default 

TABLE S18 Projected runtime under the fitted model for m ∈ { 16 , 64 , 256 , 1024 }.Calls counts assume h = 1 (full direct audits, two utility calls per marginal). Surrogate triage with h < 1 reduces total time proportionally.                                         

> Clients nMarginals mCalls Tpred (s) Tstep share 64 16 32 13.05 99.0% 64 64 128 51.80 99.7% 64 256 512 206.83 99.9% 64 1024 2048 826.92 99.98% 100 16 32 24.88 99.5% 100 64 128 99.16 99.9% 100 256 512 396.30 99.97% 100 1024 2048 1584.83 99.99%

direct-audit budget h m ≤ O(n log n), total cost is ˜O(n2.5)

per round, which is the relevant scaling for sizing the model-call budget against an operator latency SLO. 

S8.3 Calibration, Redundancy, and Drift 

LCBs use calibrated intervals rather than raw sampled-marginal variance. In the current FEVER run, naive inter-vals cover 0.25 of leave-one-out values, while conformal calibration reaches 0.8875 with mean width 0.0408. Retrieval duplicate clustering uses provenance hashes plus 

sdup (x, y ) = 0 .65 stok (x, y ) + 0 .35 stri (x, y ),

with adapter deployments adding delta-norm and target-module fingerprints. The hard-paraphrase recall at thresh-old 0.65 is 0.9575, so these checks are audit triggers, not com-plete guarantees. Other auxiliary results are consolidated as follows: collusion group caps suppress two- and three-client artificial complementarity in the tested suite; per-type LCB normalization improves adapter rare-client utility from 0.6625 to 0.6863; policy drift is visible when changing retriever or adapter-composition rules; and the software enclave adds only 0.226 ms per bounded signed release. Payments should not be reused across model, retriever, or policy changes. 

S9 PAYMENT , B UDGETING , AND DISPUTES 

S9.1 Payment Decomposition 

For each client, the ledger stores a decomposed payment: 

Si = bϕi − λσ i − βc i − γϵ priv i − η max( di, r i) + ρs i, (S3) 

pi = scale B ([ Si]+), (S4) where scale B applies the budget-feasible scaling rule. The decomposition is important for review and dispute han-dling. A client should be able to see whether low payment is due to low estimated value, high uncertainty, duplicate risk, privacy restrictions, verified cost, or manipulation risk. The operator should be able to recompute the exact payment from the contract card and ledger fields. 

S9.2 Budget Scaling 

If P 

> i

epi > B , the rule scales every positive raw payment by the same factor. This preserves payment order among clients with fixed adjustment terms and prevents the market from exceeding the budget. A deployment may add reserve IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 22 1 2 3 4 5 6

> market round
> 0.000
> 0.025
> 0.050
> 0.075
> 0.100
> 0.125
> score
> slice shift

Multi-round market dynamics 

> payment drift
> reputation penalty
> rare retained
> strategic selected
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> selection count
> Fig. S5. Six-round market dynamics with client arrivals and a slice shift after round three, separating payment drift, reputation penalty, rare retention, and strategic selections.

checks after scaling: if a client’s scaled payment falls below its verified participation cost, the client can be excluded and the remaining budget recomputed. 

S9.3 Dispute Workflow 

A dispute proceeds in five steps. First, the client submits the disputed round id, artifact id, and reason. Second, the au-ditor retrieves the contract card, registry entry, value ledger, and evidence hashes. Third, the auditor reruns determin-istic evaluations under the recorded seed where possible. Fourth, the auditor can request additional hidden probes or provenance review if duplicate, poison, or leakage flags are contested. Fifth, the ledger records a signed decision: unchanged, revalued, rejected, or escalated. The important design point is that the dispute is about auditable data artifacts, not an opaque payment number. 

S9.4 Revaluation Policy 

Model, retriever, prompt, and safety-policy changes can al-ter U (C). FedMark-FM treats a market round as immutable once settled: the original contract card, model hash, policy hash, utility weights, and evidence hashes define the value of that round. Later model or policy changes create a new round with a new contract card. The default policy is forward-looking revaluation rather than clawback, because clawbacks make participation risky and can punish honest clients for operator-side changes. Clawbacks are reserved for fraud cases where provenance, duplicate, or poison evidence shows that the original submission violated the signed contract. Figure S5 illustrates six-round market dy-namics with a slice shift after round three, showing why revaluation should be round-bound rather than silently rewriting old payments. 

S9.5 Commit-Reveal and Operator Threats 

The client threat model is not sufficient by itself: an oper-ator could collude with a seller by retrofitting a rare slice, changing hidden probes, or reweighting utility after seeing submissions. FedMark-FM therefore uses a commit-reveal round protocol. Before the submission window opens, the operator publishes and signs a contract-card hash contain-ing utility weights, rare-slice definitions, validation-slice commitments, audit policy, payment formula version, and dispute window. Clients submit artifacts against that hash. After the window closes, the operator reveals the card and evaluation seeds; auditors verify that the revealed card matches the pre-submission commitment. The multi-round stress test includes a post-hoc slice-shift condition; the ledger treats it as a new round, so prior payments remain bound to the original committed card rather than being silently recomputed. 

S9.6 Operator and Auditor Adversaries 

The strongest auditability guarantees require more than an honest operator. If the operator selectively evaluates coali-tions, the registry and ledger still expose which evaluation calls were made, but value completeness requires public sampling seeds, third-party reruns, or an external auditor. If the operator swaps the contract card, signed pre-window hashes and a public bulletin-board anchor detect the swap. If the operator redacts ledger entries, append-only storage and third-party hash anchoring reveal gaps but cannot reconstruct missing private payloads without client-side evidence. If the operator colludes with a seller, hidden-probe commitments, provenance hashes, and dispute replay limit post-hoc rare-slice and weight manipulation, but economic fairness depends on an independent auditor or buyer-side challenge process. If the auditor is compromised, signatures and public anchors preserve tamper evidence, but dispute decisions require auditor rotation, threshold signatures, or multi-auditor review. If keys are lost or stolen, old evidence remains verifiable only up to the last trusted key-rotation checkpoint. Table S19 summarizes this operator/auditor threat surface, the required mitigation, and the residual risk in each case. 

S10 THREAT MODEL 

The market assumes clients may be strategic but not om-nipotent. They may split identities, copy or paraphrase artifacts, poison data, tune to public probes, inflate costs, exaggerate privacy constraints, or collude. The market as-sumes that clients cannot forge provenance commitments, cannot break cryptographic hashes, cannot observe hidden audit probes before submitting, and cannot force the oper-ator to evaluate raw private payloads outside the declared interface. The operator is not assumed to be fully trusted for auditability claims. The base experiments assume the operator follows the published contract card, while the de-ployed protocol relies on signed cards, append-only ledgers, public hash anchors, attestation chains, and external dispute review to detect selective evaluation, card swaps, ledger redaction, and collusion. Table S20 summarizes the client-side threats, their market mitigations, and the residual risk of each. 

S11 EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS 

S11.1 Baseline Definitions 

Equal payment assigns all clients the same score before budget selection. Volume ranks clients by artifact count or IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 23 

TABLE S19 Operator/auditor threat surface. 

Adversary action What survives Required mitigation Residual risk Selective evaluation Ledger shows sampled coalitions and missing calls Public seeds, audit reruns, model-call counters Private endpoints may be unavailable later Contract-card swap Pre-window signed hash detects mis-match Public bulletin board or third-party hash anchor If no anchor exists, clients rely on operator logs Ledger redaction Hash-chain gap is detectable Append-only ledger, external checkpoints Redacted payload evidence may need client replay Seller/operator collusion Committed weights and rare slices con-strain retrofits Hidden-probe commitments and buyer/auditor challenge Collusion before card pub-lication is governance risk Auditor compromise Signatures and anchors preserve raw evi-dence integrity Auditor rotation, threshold review, public dispute summaries Bad decisions can still de-lay payment Key failure Prior checkpoints remain verifiable Key rotation, HSM/TEE-backed signing, revoca-tion log Evidence after compro-mise must be re-attested 

TABLE S20 Threat model and mitigation summary. 

Threat Client action Market mitigation Residual risk Sybil split Divide one portfolio across many identities Redundancy clusters, group marginal dis-count, duplicate penalties Semantic splits may evade weak clustering Duplicate copy Copy another client’s passages or adapter Provenance hashes, sketch similarity, dupli-cate discount Paraphrases require stronger se-mantic checks Poisoning Improve public validation while harming hidden behavior Hidden probes, risk score, audit penalty Adaptive poisoners can target unknown policies Prompt gaming Tune prompts to public probes Paraphrase probes, public-hidden gap, un-certainty discount Probe leakage weakens defense Privacy gaming Claim restrictive privacy to reduce evalua-tion visibility Lower confidence bound, alternative secure evaluation, reserve checks Legitimate privacy may also widen intervals Cost inflation Overstate collection or compute cost Verified cost, reserve prices, cost penalties Verification may be domain-specific Collusion Split complementary artifacts across identi-ties Pairwise complementarity audit and group caps True complementarity should not be over-penalized Benchmark leakage Submit data derived from validation an-swers Provenance review and hidden evaluation slices Perfect leakage detection is im-possible 

corpus size. Retrieval similarity ranks retrieval clients by similarity to validation queries or gold evidence sketches. Leave-one-client-out estimates U (N ) − U (N \ { i}), which is accurate but expensive and can behave differently from Shapley values when interactions are strong. FL-Shapley approximates marginal contribution over sampled client orderings. Shapley-UCB uses uncertainty-aware seller selec-tion inspired by bandit upper-confidence bounds. FedMark-FM differs by ranking with lower-confidence-bound value plus explicit market adjustments for cost, privacy, duplicate risk, manipulation risk, and scarcity. 

S11.2 Experiment Construction Details 

FEVER RAG shards claim-evidence pairs into honest gener-alists, rare specialists, duplicates, sybils, and poisoners. The held-out serving tracks separate validation-card selection from final test-card scoring and report task metrics without using attack labels. The trained low-rank adapter track uses lightweight PyTorch adapters, while the HF/PEFT path uses distilbert-base-uncased to report real LoRA parameters, runtime, and coalition behavior. The PEFT track proves the interface and accounting path; large multi-adapter foundation-model valuation remains future scale-up work. 

S11.3 Hyperparameters and Reporting Conventions 

We use fixed random seeds for each experiment. Bud-geted selection uses the same budget within each track for all methods. Risk-adjusted utility uses the same strategic penalty and rare-client bonus within a track. Harmful-client AUC is reported only when harmful labels exist. PEFT run-time fields are reported only when the optional PEFT depen-dencies and cached distilbert-base-uncased model are available. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 24 

TABLE S21 Retrieve–read held-out FEVER serving proxy. Accuracy, macro-F1, evidence exact match (EM), and regret are computed only on the final test card and do not use attack labels. This table is supporting evidence; Table 4 is the primary served-pipeline result. 

Attack family Method Acc. Macro-F1 EM Regret Poison Strategic Known flip FL-Shapley 0.3685 ±0.0094 0.3136 ±0.0100 0.1343 ±0.0424 0.0686 ±0.0399 0.6 2.4 Known flip Leave-one-out 0.3428 ±0.0274 0.2978 ±0.0313 0.1257 ±0.0568 0.0943 ±0.0423 0.6 2.4 Known flip FedMark-FM 0.3914 ±0.0303 0 .3490 ±0.0498 0.0914 ±0.0188 0.0457 ±0.0407 0.0 0.2 

Hard paraphrase FL-Shapley 0.3600 ±0.0399 0.3158 ±0.0521 0.0972 ±0.0321 0.0800 ±0.0563 0.4 2.2 Hard paraphrase Leave-one-out 0.3457 ±0.0311 0.2999 ±0.0400 0.1171 ±0.0610 0.0914 ±0.0368 0.4 2.2 Hard paraphrase FedMark-FM 0.3857 ±0.0137 0 .3463 ±0.0338 0.0828 ±0.0243 0.0543 ±0.0340 0.0 0.2 

Adaptive keyword FL-Shapley 0.3714 ±0.0237 0.3252 ±0.0420 0.1029 ±0.0375 0.0657 ±0.0431 0.4 2.4 Adaptive keyword Leave-one-out 0.3514 ±0.0332 0.3029 ±0.0388 0.1457 ±0.0422 0.0857 ±0.0380 0.8 2.2 Adaptive keyword FedMark-FM 0.3857 ±0.0317 0 .3437 ±0.0495 0.0886 ±0.0216 0.0514 ±0.0424 0.0 0.2